The Multidimensional Wisdom of Crowds

Pietro Perona1
Serge Belongie2
Steve Branson2
Peter Welinder1
1 California Institute of Technology, 2 University of California, San Diego
{sbranson,sjb}@cs.ucsd.edu
{welinder,perona}@caltech.edu

Abstract

Distributing labeling tasks among hundreds or thousands of annotators is an in-
creasingly important method for annotating large datasets. We present a method
for estimating the underlying value (e.g. the class) of each image from (noisy) an-
notations provided by multiple annotators. Our method is based on a model of the
image formation and annotation process. Each image has different characteristics
that are represented in an abstract Euclidean space. Each annotator is modeled as
a multidimensional entity with variables representing competence, expertise and
bias. This allows the model to discover and represent groups of annotators that
have different sets of skills and knowledge, as well as groups of images that differ
qualitatively. We ﬁnd that our model predicts ground truth labels on both syn-
thetic and real data more accurately than state of the art methods. Experiments
also show that our model, starting from a set of binary labels, may discover rich
information, such as different “schools of thought” amongst the annotators, and
can group together images belonging to separate categories.

Introduction
1
Producing large-scale training, validation and test sets is vital for many applications. Most often
this job has to be carried out “by hand” and thus it is delicate, expensive, and tedious. Services
such as Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) have made it easy to distribute simple labeling tasks to
hundreds of workers. Such “crowdsourcing” is increasingly popular and has been used to annotate
large datasets in, for example, Computer Vision [8] and Natural Language Processing [7]. As some
annotators are unreliable, the common wisdom is to collect multiple labels per exemplar and rely
on “majority voting” to determine the correct label. We propose a model for the annotation process
with the goal of obtaining more reliable labels with as few annotators as possible.
It has been observed that some annotators are more skilled and consistent in their labels than others.
We postulate that the ability of annotators is multidimensional; that is, an annotator may be good at
some aspects of a task but worse at others. Annotators may also attach different costs to different
kinds of errors, resulting in different biases for the annotations. Furthermore, different pieces of
data may be easier or more difﬁcult to label. All of these factors contribute to a “noisy” annotation
process resulting in inconsistent labels. Although approaches for modeling certain aspects of the
annotation process have been proposed in the past [1, 5, 6, 9, 13, 4, 12], no attempt has been made
to blend all characteristics of the process into a single uniﬁed model.
This paper has two main contributions: (1) we improve on current state-of-the-art methods for
crowdsourcing by introducing a more comprehensive and accurate model of the human annota-
tion process, and (2) we provide insight into the human annotation process by learning a richer
representation that distinguishes amongst the different sources of annotator error. Understanding
the annotation process can be important toward quantifying the extent to which datasets constructed
from human data are “ground truth”.
We propose a generative Bayesian model for the annotation process. We describe an inference
algorithm to estimate the properties of the data being labeled and the annotators labeling them. We
show on synthetic and real data that the model can be used to estimate data difﬁculty and annotator

1

Figure 1: (a) Sample MTurk task where annotators were asked to click on images of Indigo Bunting (described
in Section 5.2). (b) The image formation process. The class variable zi models if the object (Indigo Bunting)
will be present (zi = 1) or absent (zi = 0) in the image, while a number of “nuisance factors” inﬂuence
the appearance of the image. The image is then transformed into a low-dimensional representation xi which
captures the main attributes that are considered by annotators in labeling the image. (c) Probabilistic graphical
model of the entire annotation process where image formation is summarized by the nodes zi and xi . The
observed variables, indicated by shaded circles, are the index i of the image, index j of the annotators, and
value lij of the label provided by annotator j for image i. The annotation process is repeated for all i and for
multiple j thus obtaining multiple labels per image with each annotator labeling multiple images (see Section 3).
biases, while identifying annotators’ different “areas of strength”. While many of our results are
valid for general labels and tasks, we focus on the binary labeling of images.

2 Related Work
The advantages and drawbacks of using crowdsourcing services for labeling large datasets have
been explored by various authors [2, 7, 8]. In general, it has been found that many labels are of
high quality [8], but a few sloppy annotators do low quality work [7, 12]; thus the need for efﬁcient
algorithms for integrating the labels from many annotators [5, 12]. A related topic is that of using
paired games for obtaining annotations, which can be seen as a form of crowdsourcing [10, 11].
Methods for combining the labels from many different annotators have been studied before. Dawid
and Skene [1] presented a model for multi-valued annotations where the biases and skills of the
annotators were modeled by a confusion matrix. This model was generalized and extended to other
annotation types by Welinder and Perona [12]. Similarly, the model presented by Raykar et al. [4]
considered annotator bias in the context of training binary classiﬁers with noisy labels. Building
on these works, our model goes a step further in modeling each annotator as a multidimensional
classiﬁer in an abstract feature space. We also draw inspiration from Whitehill et al. [13], who
modeled both annotator competence and image difﬁculty, but did not consider annotator bias. Our
model generalizes [13] by introducing a high-dimensional concept of image difﬁculty and combin-
ing it with a broader deﬁnition of annotator competence. Other approaches have been proposed
for non-binary annotations [9, 6, 12]. By modeling annotator competence and image difﬁculty as
multidimensional quantities, our approach achieves better performance on real data than previous
methods and provides a richer output space for separating groups of annotators and images.

3 The Annotation Process
An annotator, indexed by j , looks at image Ii and assigns it a label lij . Competent annotators
provide accurate and precise labels, while unskilled annotators provide inconsistent labels. There
is also the possibility of adversarial annotators assigning labels that are opposite to those assigned
by competent annotators. Annotators may have different areas of strength, or expertise, and thus
provide more reliable labels on different subsets of images. For example, when asked to label
images containing ducks some annotators may be more aware of the distinction between ducks and
geese while others may be more aware of the distinction between ducks, grebes, and cormorants
(visually similar bird species). Furthermore, different annotators may weigh errors differently; one
annotator may be intolerant of false positives, while another is more optimistic and accepts the cost
of a few false positives in order to get a higher detection rate. Lastly, the difﬁculty of the image
may also matter. A difﬁcult or ambiguous image may be labeled inconsistently even by competent
annotators, while an easy image is labeled consistently even by sloppy annotators. In modeling the
annotation process, all of these factors should be considered.

2

(a)Iizispeciesspecimenlocationweatherposeviewpointcameraxi...(b)lijxiNMijσjyijθzziJiβwjτjγαimagesannotatorslabels|Lij|!"#$We model the annotation process in a sequence of steps. N images are produced by some image
capture/collection process. First, a variable zi decides which set of “objects” contribute to producing
an image Ii . For example, zi ∈ {0, 1} may denote the presence/absence of a particular bird species.
A number of “nuisance factors,” such as viewpoint and pose, determine the image (see Figure 1).
Each image is transformed by a deterministic “visual transformation” converting pixels into a vector
of task-speciﬁc measurements xi , representing measurements that are available to the visual system
of an ideal annotator. For example, the xi could be the ﬁring rates of task-relevant neurons in the
brain of the best human annotator. Another way to think about xi is that it is a vector of visual
attributes (beak shape, plumage color, tail length etc) that the annotator will consider when deciding
on a label. The process of transforming zi to the “signal” xi is stochastic and it is parameterized by
θz , which accounts for the variability in image formation due to the nuisance factors.
There are M annotators in total, and the set of annotators that label image i is denoted by Ji .
An annotator j ∈ Ji , selected to label image Ii , does not have direct access to xi , but rather to
yij = xi + nij , a version of the signal corrupted by annotator-speciﬁc and image-speciﬁc “noise”
nij . The noise process models differences between the measurements that are ultimately available
to individual annotators. These differences may be due to visual acuity, attention, direction of gaze,
etc. The statistics of this noise are different from annotator to annotator and are parametrized by σj .
Most signiﬁcantly, the variance of the noise will be lower for competent annotators, as they are more
likely to have access to a clearer and more consistent representation of the image than confused or
unskilled annotators.
The vector yij can be understood as a perceptual encoding that encompasses all major components
that affect an annotator’s judgment on an annotation task. Each annotator is parameterized by a unit
vector ˆwj , which models the annotator’s individual weighting on each of these components. In this
way, ˆwj encodes the training or expertise of the annotator in a multidimensional space. The scalar
projection (cid:104)yij , ˆwj (cid:105) is compared to a threshold ˆτj . If the signal is above the threshold, the annotator
assigns a label lij = 1, and lij = 0 otherwise.

p(L, z , x, y , σ, ˆw, ˆτ ) =

p(σj )p( ˆτj )p( ˆwj )

p(yij | xi , σj ) p(lij | ˆwj , ˆτj , yij )

4 Model and Inference
Putting together the assumptions of the previous section, we obtain the graphical model shown in
Figure 1. We will assume a Bayesian treatment, with priors on all parameters. The joint probability
p(zi )p(xi | zi )
 ,
distribution, excluding hyper-parameters for brevity, can be written as
(cid:89)
N(cid:89)
M(cid:89)
j∈Ji
i=1
j=1
(1)
where we denote z , x, y , σ , ˆτ , ˆw , and L to mean the sets of all the corresponding subscripted
variables. This section describes further assumptions on the probability distributions. These as-
sumptions are not necessary; however, in practice they simplify inference without compromising
the quality of the parameter estimates.
Although both zi and lij may be continuous or multivalued discrete in a more general treatment
of the model [12], we henceforth assume that they are binary, i.e. zi , lij ∈ {0, 1}. We assume a
Bernoulli prior on zi with p(zi = 1) = β , and that xi is normally distributed1 with variance θ2
z ,
(2)
p(xi | zi ) = N (xi ; µz , θ2
z ),
where µz = −1 if zi = 0 and µz = 1 if zi = 1 (see Figure 2a). If xi and yij are multi-dimensional,
then σj is a covariance matrix. These assumptions are equivalent to using a mixture of Gaussians
prior on xi .
The noisy version of the signal xi that annotator j sees, denoted by yij , is assumed to be generated by
a Gaussian with variance σ2
j centered at xi , that is p(yij | xi , σj ) = N (yij ; xi , σ2
j ) (see Figure 2b).
We assume that each annotator assigns the label lij according to a linear classiﬁer. The classiﬁer is
parameterized by a direction ˆwj of a decision plane and a bias ˆτj . The label lij is deterministically
chosen, i.e. lij = I ((cid:104) ˆwj , yij (cid:105) ≥ ˆτj ), where I (·) is the indicator function. It is possible to integrate
1We used the parameters β = 0.5 and θz = 0.8.

3

,

(3)

Figure 2: Assumptions of the model. (a) Labeling is modeled in a signal detection theory framework, where
the signal yij that annotator j sees for image Ii is produced by one of two Gaussian distributions. Depending
on yij and annotator parameters wj and τj , the annotator labels 1 or 0. (b) The image representation xi is
assumed to be generated by a Gaussian mixture model where zi selects the component. The ﬁgure shows 8
different realizations xi (x1 , . . . , x8 ), generated from the mixture model. Depending on the annotator j , noise
nij is added to xi . The three lower plots shows the noise distributions for three different annotators (A,B,C),
with increasing “incompetence” σj . The biases τj of the annotators are shown with the red bars. Image no. 4,
represented by x4 , is the most ambiguous image, as it is very close to the optimal decision plane at xi = 0. (c)
An example of 2-dimensional xi . The red line shows the decision plane for one annotator.
(cid:18)
(cid:19)
out yij and put lij in direct dependence on xi ,

(cid:104) ˆwj , xi (cid:105) − ˆτj
p(lij = 1 | xi , σj , ˆτj ) = Φ
σj
where Φ(·) is the cumulative standardized normal distribution, a sigmoidal-shaped function.
In order to remove the constraint on ˆwj being a direction, i.e. (cid:107) ˆwj (cid:107)2 = 1, we reparameterize the
problem with wj = ˆwj /σj and τj = ˆτj /σj . Furthermore, to regularize wj and τj during inference,
we give them Gaussian priors parameterized by α and γ respectively. The prior on τj is centered at
the origin and is very broad (γ = 3). For the prior on wj , we kept the center close to the origin to
be initially pessimistic of the annotator competence, and to allow for adversarial annotators (mean
1, std 3). All of the hyperparameters were chosen somewhat arbitrarily to deﬁne a scale for the
parameter space, and in our experiments we found that results (such as error rates in Figure 3) were
 .
p(xi | θz , β )
quite insensitive to variations in the hyperparameters. The modiﬁed Equation 1 becomes,
(cid:89)
M(cid:89)
N(cid:89)
p(lij | xi , wj , τj )
j∈Ji
i=1
j=1
The only observed variables in the model are the labels L = {lij }, from which the other parameters
have to be inferred. Since we have priors on the parameters, we proceed by MAP estimation, where
we ﬁnd the optimal parameters (x(cid:63) , w(cid:63) , τ (cid:63) ) by maximizing the posterior on the parameters,
(x(cid:63) , w(cid:63) , τ (cid:63) ) = arg max
p(x, w, τ | L) = arg max
x,w,τ
x,w,τ
where we have deﬁned m(x, w, τ ) = log p(L, x, w, τ ) from Equation 4. Thus, to do inference, we
need to optimize
N(cid:88)
M(cid:88)
M(cid:88)
j=1
j=1
i=1
[lij log Φ ((cid:104)wj , xi (cid:105) − τj ) + (1 − lij ) log (1 − Φ ((cid:104)wj , xi (cid:105) − τj ))] .

log p(xi | θz , β ) +
(cid:88)
N(cid:88)
j∈Ji
i=1
To maximize (6) we carry out alternating optimization using gradient ascent. We begin by ﬁxing the
x parameters and optimizing Equation 6 for (w, τ ) using gradient ascent. Then we ﬁx (w, τ ) and
optimize for x using gradient ascent, iterating between ﬁxing the image parameters and annotator
parameters back and forth. Empirically, we have observed that this optimization scheme usually
converges within 20 iterations.

log p(wj | α) +

log p(τj | γ )

p(L, x, w, τ ) =

p(τj | γ )p(wj | α)

m(x, w, τ ),

(4)

(5)

(6)

m(x, w, τ ) =

+

4

x1ix2ixi=(x1i,x2i)wj=(w1j,w2j)τjp(xi|zi=0)p(xi|zi=1)−3−2−10 123−3−2−1012312345678(a)(b)(c)p(yij|zi=1)p(yij|zi=0)xiABCp(xi|zi=0)p(xi|zi=1)p(yij|xi)τjτjyijyijd

=

=

.

(7)

µ1 − µ0
s

Figure 3: (a) and (b) show the correlation between the ground truth and estimated parameters as the number
of annotators increases on synthetic data for 1-d and 2-d xi and wj . (c) Performance of our model in predicting
zi on the data from (a), compared to majority voting, the model of [1], and GLAD [13]. (d) Performance on
real labels collected from MTurk. See Section 5.1 for details on (a-c) and Section 5.2 for details on (d).
In the derivation of the model above, there is no restriction on the dimensionality of xi and wj ;
they may be one-dimensional scalars or higher-dimensional vectors. In the former case, assuming
ˆwj = 1, the model is equivalent to a standard signal detection theoretic model [3] where a signal
yij is generated by one of two Normal distributions p(yij | zi ) = N (yij | µz , s2 ) with variance
j , centered on µ0 = −1 and µ1 = 1 for zi = 0 and zi = 1 respectively (see Figure 2a).
s2 = θ2
z + σ2
In signal detection theory, the sensitivity index, conventionally denoted d(cid:48) , is a measure of how well
the annotator can discriminate the two values of zi [14]. It is deﬁned as the Mahalanobis distance
2(cid:113)
between µ0 and µ1 normalized by s,
(cid:48)
z + σ2
θ2
j
Thus, the lower σj , the better the annotator can distinguish between classes of zi , and the more
“competent” he is. The sensitivity index can also be computed directly from the false alarm rate f
(cid:0)Φ−1 (h) + Φ−1 (f )(cid:1). A large positive λ means that the annotator attributes a high cost
and hit rate h using d(cid:48) = Φ−1 (h) − Φ−1 (f ) where Φ−1 (·) is the inverse of the cumulative normal
distribution [14]. Similarly, the “threshold”, which is a measure of annotator bias, can be computed
by λ = − 1
2
to false positives, while a large negative λ means the annotator avoids false negative mistakes. Under
the assumptions of our model, λ is related to τj in our model by the relation λ = ˆτj /s.
In the case of higher dimensional xi and wj , each component of the xi vector can be thought of as an
attribute or a high level feature. For example, the task may be to label only images with a particular
bird species, say “duck”, with label 1, and all other images with 0. Some images contain no birds
at all, while other images contain birds similar to ducks, such as geese or grebes. Some annotators
may be more aware of the distinction between ducks and geese and others may be more aware of
the distinction between ducks, grebes and cormorants. In this case, xi can be considered to be 2-
dimensional. One dimension represents image attributes that are useful in the distinction between
ducks and geese, and the other dimension models parameters that are useful in distinction between
ducks and grebes (see Figure 2c). Presumably all annotators see the same attributes, signiﬁed by xi ,
but they use them differently. The model can distinguish between annotators with preferences for
different attributes, as shown in Section 5.2.
Image difﬁculty is represented in the model by the value of xi (see Figure 2b). If there is a particular
ground truth decision plane, (w (cid:48) , τ (cid:48) ), images Ii with xi close to the plane will be more difﬁcult for
annotators to label. This is because the annotators see a noise corrupted version, yij , of xi . How
well the annotators can label a particular image depends on both the closeness of xi to the ground
truth decision plane and the annotator’s “noise” level, σj . Of course, if the annotator bias τj is far
from the ground truth decision plane, the labels for images near the ground truth decision plane will
be consistent for that annotator, but not necessarily correct.

5 Experiments
5.1 Synthetic Data
To explore whether the inference procedure estimates image and annotator parameters accurately,
we tested our model on synthetic data generated according to the model’s assumptions. Similar to
the experimental setup in [13], we generated 500 synthetic image parameters and simulated between
4 and 20 annotators labeling each image. The procedure was repeated 40 times to reduce the noise
in the results.
We generated the annotator parameters by randomly sampling σj from a Gamma distribution (shape
1.5 and scale 0.3) and biases τj from a Normal distribution centered at 0 with standard deviation

5

number of annotatorsnumber of annotatorsnumber of annotatorsnumber of annotatorsFigure 4: Ellipse dataset. (a) The images to be labeled were fuzzy ellipses (oriented uniformly from 0 to π )
enclosed in dark circles. The task was to select ellipses that were more vertical than horizontal (the former are
marked with green circles in the ﬁgure). (b-d) The image difﬁculty parameters xi , annotator competence 2/s,
and bias ˆτj /s learned by our model are compared to the ground truth equivalents. The closer xi is to 0, the
more ambiguous/difﬁcult the discrimination task, corresponding to ellipses that have close to 45◦ orientation.
0.5. The direction of the decision plane wj was +1 with probability 0.99 and −1 with probability
0.01. The image parameters xi were generated by a two-dimensional Gaussian mixture model with
two components of standard deviation 0.8 centered at -1 and +1. The image ground truth label
zi , and thus the mixture component from which xi was generated, was sampled from a Bernoulli
distribution with p(zi = 1) = 0.5.
For each trial, we measured the correlation between the ground truth values of each parameter and
the values estimated by the model. We averaged Spearman’s rank correlation coefﬁcient for each
parameter over all trials. The result of the simulated labeling process is shown Figure 3a. As can
be seen from the ﬁgure, the model estimates the parameters accurately, with the accuracy increasing
as the number of annotators labeling each image increases. We repeated a similar experiment with
2-dimensional xi and wj (see Figure 3b). As one would expect, estimating higher dimensional xi
and wj requires more data.
We also examined how well our model estimated the binary class values, zi . For comparison, we also
tried three other methods on the same data: a simple majority voting rule for each image, the bias-
competence model of [1], and the GLAD algorithm from [13]2 , which models 1-d image difﬁculty
and annotator competence, but not bias. As can be seen from Figure 3c, our method presents a small
but consistent improvement. In a separate experiment (not shown) we generated synthetic annotators
with increasing bias parameters τj . We found that GLAD performs worse than majority voting when
the variance in the bias between different annotators is high (γ (cid:38) 0.8); this was expected as GLAD
does not model annotator bias. Similarly, increasing the proportion of difﬁcult images degrades the
performance of the model from [1]. The performance of our model points to the beneﬁts of modeling
all aspects of the annotation process.

5.2 Human Data
We next conducted experiments on annotation results from real MTurk annotators. To compare the
performance of the different models on a real discrimination task, we prepared dataset of 200 images
of birds (100 with Indigo Bunting, and 100 with Blue Grosbeak), and asked 40 annotators per image
if it contained at least one Indigo Bunting; this is a challenging task (see Figure 1). The annotators
were given a description and example photos of the two bird species. Figure 3d shows how the
performance varies as the number of annotators per image is increased. We sampled a subset of the
annotators for each image. Our model did better than the other approaches also on this dataset.
To demonstrate that annotator competence, annotator bias, image difﬁculty, and multi-dimensional
decision surfaces are important real life phenomena affecting the annotation process, and to quantify
our model’s ability to adapt to each of them, we tested our model on three different image datasets:
one based on pictures of rotated ellipses, another based on synthetically generated “greebles”, and a
third dataset with images of waterbirds.
Ellipse Dataset: Annotators were given the simple task of selecting ellipses which they believed
to be more vertical than horizontal. This dataset was chosen to make the model’s predictions quan-

2We used the implementation of GLAD available on the ﬁrst author’s website: http://mplab.ucsd.edu/˜jake/
We varied the α prior in their code between 1-10 to achieve best performance.

6

(a)(b)(c)(d)Figure 5: Estimated image parameters (symbols) and annotator decision planes (lines) for the greeble ex-
periment. Our model learns two image parameter dimensions x1
i and x2
i which roughly correspond to color
and height, and identiﬁes two clusters of annotator decision planes, which correctly correspond to annotators
primed with color information (green lines) and height information (red lines). On the left are example images
of class 1, which are shorter and more yellow (red and blue dots are uncorrelated with class), and on the right
are images of class 2, which are taller and more green. C and F are easy for all annotators, A and H are
difﬁcult for annotators that prefer height but easy for annotators that prefer color, D and E are difﬁcult for
annotators that prefer color but easy for annotators that prefer height, B and G are difﬁcult for all annotators.

tiﬁable, because ground truth class labels and ellipse angle parameters are known to us for each test
image (but hidden from the inference algorithm).
By deﬁnition, ellipses at an angle of 45◦ are impossible to classify, and we expect that images
gradually become easier to classify as the angle moves away from 45◦ . We used a total of 180 ellipse
images, with rotation angle varying from 1-180◦ , and collected labels from 20 MTurk annotators for
each image. In this dataset, the estimated image parameters xi and annotator parameters wj are 1-
dimensional, where the magnitudes encode image difﬁculty and annotator competence respectively.
Since we had ground truth labels, we could compute the false alarm and hit rates for each annotator,
and thus compute λ and d(cid:48) for comparison with ˆτj /s and 2/s (see Equation 7 and following text).
The results in Figure 4b-d show that annotator competence and bias vary among annotators. More-
over, the ﬁgure shows that our model accurately estimates image difﬁculty, annotator competence,
and annotator bias on data from real MTurk annotators.
Greeble Dataset:
In the second experiment, annotators were shown pictures of “greebles” (see
Figure 5) and were told that the greebles belonged to one of two classes. Some annotators were
told that the two greeble classes could be discriminated by height, while others were told they could
be discriminated by color (yellowish vs. green). This was done to explore the scenario in which
annotators have different types of prior knowledge or abilities. We used a total of 200 images with
20 annotators labeling each image. The height and color parameters for the two types of greebles
were randomly generated according to Gaussian distributions with centers (1, 1) and (−1, −1), and
standard deviations of 0.8.
The results in Figure 5 show that the model successfully learned two clusters of annotator decision
surfaces, one (green) of which responds mostly to the ﬁrst dimension of xi (color) and another (red)
responding mostly to the second dimension of xi (height). These two clusters coincide with the
sets of annotators primed with the two different attributes. Additionally, for the second attribute, we
observed a few “adversarial” annotators whose labels tended to be inverted from their true values.
This was because the instructions to our color annotation task were ambiguously worded, so that
some annotators had become confused and had inverted their labels. Our model robustly handles
these adversarial labels by inverting the sign of the ˆw vector.
Waterbird Dataset: The greeble experiment shows that our model is able to segregate annotators
looking for different attributes in images. To see whether the same phenomenon could be observed in
a task involving images of real objects, we constructed an image dataset of waterbirds. We collected
50 photographs each of the bird species Mallard, American Black Duck, Canada Goose and Red-
necked Grebe. In addition to the 200 images of waterbirds, we also selected 40 images without any
birds at all (such as photos of various nature scenes and objects) or where birds were too small be
seen clearly, making 240 images in total. For each image, we asked 40 annotators on MTurk if they
could see a duck in the image (only Mallards and American Black Ducks are ducks). The hypothesis

7

EFGHABCDx1ix2iFigure 6: Estimated image and annotator parameters on the Waterbirds dataset. The annotators were asked
to select images containing at least one “duck”. The estimated xi parameters for each image are marked with
symbols that are speciﬁc to the class the image belongs to. The arrows show the xi coordinates of some example
images. The gray lines are the decision planes of the annotators. The darkness of the lines is an indicator of
(cid:107)wj (cid:107): darker gray means the model estimated the annotator to be more competent. Notice how the annotators’
decision planes fall roughly into three clusters, marked by the blue circles and discussed in Section 5.2.
was that some annotators would be able to discriminate ducks from the two other bird species, while
others would confuse ducks with geese and/or grebes.
Results from the experiment, shown in Figure 6, suggest that there are at least three different groups
of annotators, those who separate: (1) ducks from everything else, (2) ducks and grebes from every-
thing else, and (3) ducks, grebes, and geese from everything else; see numbered circles in Figure 6.
Interestingly, the ﬁrst group of annotators was better at separating out Canada geese than Red-necked
grebes. This may be because Canada geese are quite distinctive with their long, black necks, while
the grebes have shorter necks and look more duck-like in most poses. There were also a few outlier
annotators that did not provide answers consistent with any other annotators. This is a common
phenomenon on MTurk, where a small percentage of the annotators will provide bad quality labels
in the hope of still getting paid [7]. We also compared the labels predicted by the different models
to the ground truth. Majority voting performed at 68.3% correct labels, GLAD at 60.4%, and our
model performed at 75.4%.
6 Conclusions
We have proposed a Bayesian generative probabilistic model for the annotation process. Given
only binary labels of images from many different annotators, it is possible to infer not only the
underlying class (or value) of the image, but also parameters such as image difﬁculty and annota-
tor competence and bias. Furthermore, the model represents both the images and the annotators
as multidimensional entities, with different high level attributes and strengths respectively. Experi-
ments with images annotated by MTurk workers show that indeed different annotators have variable
competence level and widely different biases, and that the annotators’ classiﬁcation criterion is best
modeled in multidimensional space. Ultimately, our model can accurately estimate the ground truth
labels by integrating the labels provided by several annotators with different skills, and it does so
better than the current state of the art methods.
Besides estimating ground truth classes from binary labels, our model provides information that is
valuable for deﬁning loss functions and for training classiﬁers. For example, the image parame-
ters estimated by our model could be taken into account for weighing different training examples,
or, more generally, it could be used for a softer deﬁnition of ground truth. Furthermore, our ﬁnd-
ings suggest that annotators fall into different groups depending on their expertise and on how they
perceive the task. This could be used to select annotators that are experts on certain tasks and to
discover different schools of thought on how to carry out a given task.

Acknowledgements

P.P. and P.W. were supported by ONR MURI Grant #N00014-06-1-0734 and EVOLUT.ONR2. S.B. was sup-
ported by NSF CAREER Grant #0448615, NSF Grant AGS-0941760, ONR MURI Grant #N00014-08-1-0638,
and a Google Research Award.

8

123x1ix2iReferences
[1] A. P. Dawid and A. M. Skene. Maximum likelihood estimation of observer error-rates using
the em algorithm. J. Roy. Statistical Society, Series C, 28(1):20–28, 1979. 1, 2, 5, 6
[2] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei.
ImageNet: A Large-Scale
Hierarchical Image Database. In CVPR, 2009. 2
[3] D.M. Green and J.M. Swets. Signal detection theory and psychophysics. John Wiley and Sons
Inc, New York, 1966. 5
[4] V.C. Raykar, S. Yu, L.H. Zhao, A. Jerebko, C. Florin, G.H. Valadez, L. Bogoni, and L. Moy.
Supervised Learning from Multiple Experts: Whom to trust when everyone lies a bit. In ICML,
2009. 1, 2
[5] V.S. Sheng, F. Provost, and P.G. Ipeirotis. Get another label? improving data quality and data
mining using multiple, noisy labelers. In KDD, 2008. 1, 2
[6] P. Smyth, U. Fayyad, M. Burl, P. Perona, and P. Baldi. Inferring ground truth from subjective
labelling of Venus images. NIPS, 1995. 1, 2
[7] R. Snow, B. O’Connor, D. Jurafsky, and A.Y. Ng. Cheap and Fast - But is it Good? Evaluating
Non-Expert Annotations for Natural Language Tasks. In EMNLP, 2008. 1, 2, 8
[8] A. Sorokin and D. Forsyth. Utility data annotation with amazon mechanical turk.
IEEE Workshop on Internet Vision at CVPR’08, 2008. 1, 2
[9] M. Spain and P. Perona. Some objects are more equal than others: measuring and predicting
importance. In ECCV, 2008. 1, 2
[10] L. von Ahn and L. Dabbish. Labeling images with a computer game. In SIGCHI conference
on Human factors in computing systems, pages 319–326, 2004. 2
[11] L. von Ahn, B. Maurer, C. McMillen, D. Abraham, and M. Blum. reCAPTCHA: Human-based
character recognition via web security measures. Science, 321(5895):1465–1468, 2008. 2
[12] Peter Welinder and Pietro Perona. Online crowdsourcing: rating annotators and obtaining cost-
effective labels. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops
(ACVHL), 2010. 1, 2, 3
[13] J. Whitehill, P. Ruvolo, T. Wu, J. Bergsma, and J. Movellan. Whose vote should count more:
Optimal integration of labels from labelers of unknown expertise. In NIPS, 2009. 1, 2, 5, 6
[14] T. D. Wickens. Elementary signal detection theory. Oxford University Press, United States,
2002. 5

In First

9

