Functional Geometry Alignment
and Localization of Brain Areas

Georg Langs, Polina Golland
Computer Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
langs@csail.mit.edu, polina@csail.mit.edu

Yanmei Tie, Laura Rigolo, Alexandra J. Golby
Department of Neurosurgery, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School
Boston, MA 02115, USA
ytie@bwh.harvard.edu, lrigolo@bwh.harvard.edu
agolby@bwh.harvard.edu

Abstract

Matching functional brain regions across individuals is a challenging task, largely
due to the variability in their location and extent. It is particularly difﬁcult, but
highly relevant, for patients with pathologies such as brain tumors, which can
cause substantial reorganization of functional systems. In such cases spatial regis-
tration based on anatomical data is only of limited value if the goal is to establish
correspondences of functional areas among different individuals, or to localize
potentially displaced active regions. Rather than rely on spatial alignment, we
propose to perform registration in an alternative space whose geometry is gov-
erned by the functional interaction patterns in the brain. We ﬁrst embed each
brain into a functional map that reﬂects connectivity patterns during a fMRI ex-
periment. The resulting functional maps are then registered, and the obtained
correspondences are propagated back to the two brains. In application to a lan-
guage fMRI experiment, our preliminary results suggest that the proposed method
yields improved functional correspondences across subjects. This advantage is
pronounced for subjects with tumors that affect the language areas and thus cause
spatial reorganization of the functional regions.

1 Introduction

Alignment of functional neuroanatomy across individuals forms the basis for the study of the func-
tional organization of the brain. It is important for localization of speciﬁc functional regions and
characterization of functional systems in a population. Furthermore, the characterization of variabil-
ity in location of speciﬁc functional areas is itself informative of the mechanisms of brain formation
and reorganization. In this paper we propose to align neuroanatomy based on the functional geome-
try of fMRI signals during speciﬁc cognitive processes. For each subject, we construct a map based
on spectral embedding of the functional connectivity of the fMRI signals and register those maps to
establish correspondence between functional areas in different subjects.
Standard registration methods that match brain anatomy, such as the Talairach normalization [21]
or non-rigid registration techniques like [10, 20], accurately match the anatomical structures across
individuals. However the variability of the functional locations relative to anatomy can be substantial
[8, 22, 23], which limits the usefulness of such alignment in functional experiments. The relationship
between anatomy and function becomes even less consistent in the presence of pathological changes
in the brain, caused by brain tumors, epilepsy or other diseases [2, 3].

1

Figure 1: Standard anatomical registration and the proposed functional geometry alignment. Func-
tional geometry alignment matches the diffusion maps of fMRI signals of two subjects.

Integrating functional features into the registration process promises to alleviate this challenge. Re-
cently proposed methods match the centers of activated cortical areas [22, 26], or estimate dense
correspondences of cortical surfaces [18]. The fMRI signals at the surface points serve as a feature
vector, and registration is performed by maximizing the inter-subject fMRI correlation of matched
points, while at the same time regularizing the surface warp to preserve cortical topology and pe-
nalizing cortex folding and metric distortion, similar to [9]. In [7] registration of a population of
subjects is accomplished by using the functional connectivity pattern of cortical points as a descrip-
tor of the cortical surface. It is warped so that the Frobenius norm of the difference between the
connectivity matrices of the reference subject and the matched subject is minimized, while at the
same time a topology-preserving deformation of the cortex is enforced.
All the methods described above rely on a spatial reference frame for registration, and use the func-
tional characteristics as a feature vector of individual cortical surface points or the entire surface.
This might have limitations in the case of severe pathological changes that cause a substantial re-
organization of the functional structures. Examples include the migration to the other hemisphere,
changes in topology of the functional maps, or substitution of functional roles played by one dam-
aged region with another area. In contrast, our approach to functional registration does not rely on
spatial consistency.
Spectral embedding [27] represents data points in a map that reﬂects a large set of measured pair-
wise afﬁnity values in a euclidean space. Previously we used spectral methods to map voxels of
a fMRI sequence into a space that captures joint functional characteristics of brain regions [14].
This approach represents the level of interaction by the density in the embedding. In [24], different
embedding methods were compared in a study of parceled resting-state fMRI data. Functionally ho-
mogeneous units formed clusters in the embedding. In [11] multidimensional scaling was employed
to retrieve a low dimensional representation of positron emission tomography (PET) signals after
selecting sets of voxels by the standard activation detection technique [12].
Here we propose and demonstrate a functional registration method that operates in a space that
reﬂects functional connectivity patterns of the brain. In this space, the connectivity structure is cap-
tured by a structured distribution of points, or functional geometry. Each point in the distribution
represents a location in the brain and the relation of its fMRI signal to signals at other locations.
Fig. 1 illustrates the method. To register functional regions among two individuals, we ﬁrst embed
both fMRI volumes independently, and then obtain correspondences by matching the two point dis-
tributions in the functional geometry. We argue that such a representation offers a more natural view
of the co-activation patterns than the spatial structure augmented with functional feature vectors.
The functional geometry can handle long-range reorganizations and topological variability in the
functional organization of different individuals. Furthermore, by translating connectivity strength
to distances we are able to regularize the registration effectively. Strong connections are preserved
during registration in the map by penalizing high-frequencies in the map deformation ﬁeld.
The clinical goal of our work is to reliably localize language areas in tumor patients. The functional
connectivity pattern for a speciﬁc area provides a reﬁned representation of its activity that can aug-
ment the individual activation pattern. Our approach is to utilize connectivity information to improve
localization of the functional areas in tumor patients. Our method transfers the connectivity patterns
from healthy subjects to tumor patients. The transferred patterns then serve as a patient-speciﬁc
prior for functional localization, improving the accuracy of detection. The functional geometry we
use is largely independent of the underlying anatomical organization. As a consequence, our method
handles substantial changes in spatial arrangement of the functional areas that typically present sig-

2

registrationbrain 1brain 2embeddingembeddingregistrationbrain 2brain 1Registration based on anatomical dataRegistration based on the functional geometryniﬁcant challenges for anatomical registration methods. Such functional priors promise to improve
detection accuracy in the challenging case of language area localization. The mapping of healthy
networks to patients provides additional evidence for the location of the language areas. It promises
to enhance accuracy and robustness of localization.
In addition to localization, studies of reconﬁguration mechanisms in the presence of lesions aim
to understand how speciﬁc sub-areas are redistributed (e.g., do they migrate to a compact area, or
to other intact language areas). While standard detection identiﬁes the regions whose activation
is correlated with the experimental protocol, we seek a more detailed description of the functional
roles of the detected regions, based on the functional connectivity patterns.
We evaluate the method on healthy control subjects and brain tumor patients who perform language
mapping tasks. The language system is highly distributed across the cortex. Tumor growth some-
times causes a reorganization that sustains language ability of the patient, even though the anatomy
is severely changed. Our initial experimental results indicate that the proposed functional alignment
outperforms anatomical registration in predicting activation in target subjects (both healthy controls
and patients). Furthermore functional alignment can handle substantial reorganizations and is much
less affected by the tumor presence than anatomical registration.

2 Embedding the brain in a functional geometry

We ﬁrst review the representation of the functional geometry that captures the co-activation patterns
in a diffusion map deﬁned on the fMRI voxels [6, 14]. Given a fMRI sequence I ∈ RT ×N that
contains N voxels, each characterized by an fMRI signal over T time points, we calculate matrix
C ∈ RN ×N that assigns each pair of voxels hk , li with corresponding time courses Ik and Il a
non-negative symmetric weight

corr(Ik ,Il )
c(k , l) = e
(1)
,

where corr is the correlation coefﬁcient of the two signals Ik and Il , and  is the speed of weight
decay. We deﬁne a graph whose vertices correspond to voxels and whose edge weights are deter-
mined by C. In practice, we discard all edges that have a weight below a chosen threshold if they
connect nodes with a large distance in the anatomical space. This construction yields a sparse graph
which is then transformed into a Markov chain. Note that in contrast to methods like multidimen-
sional scaling, this sparsity reﬂects the intuition that meaningful information about the connectivity
construction [5]. The degree of each node g(k) = P
structure is encoded by the high correlation values.
We transform the graph into a Markov chain on the set of nodes by the normalized graph Laplacian
l c(k , l) is used to deﬁne the directed edge
weights of the Markov chain as
p(k , l) = c(k , l)
(2)
g(k) ,
deﬁnes a diffusion operator P f (x) = P p(x, y)f (y) on the graph vertices (voxels). The diffusion
which can be interpreted as transition probabilities along the graph edges. This set of probabilities
operator integrates all pairwise relations in the graph and deﬁnes a geometry on the entire set of
fMRI signals.
We embed the graph in a Euclidean space via an eigenvalue decomposition of P [6]. The eigenvalue
decomposition of the operator P results in a sequence of decreasing eigen values λ1 , λ2 . . . and cor-
responding eigen vectors Ψ1 , Ψ2 , . . . that satisfy P Ψi = λiΨi and constitute the so-called diffusion
map:
Ψt , hλt
wΨw i,
1Ψ1 . . . λt
(3)
where w ≤ T is the dimensionality of the representation, and t is a parameter that controls scaling
t ∈ Rw is the representation of voxel k in the functional
of the axes in this newly deﬁned space. Ψk
geometry; it comprises the k th components of the ﬁrst w eigenvectors. We will refer to Rw as
the functional space. The global structure of the functional connectivity is reﬂected in the point
distribution Ψt . The axes of the eigenspace are the directions that capture the highest amount of
structure in the connectivity landscape of the graph.
This functional geometry is governed by the diffusion distance Dt on the graph: Dt (k , l) is deﬁned
through the probability of traveling between two vertices k and l by taking all paths of at most t steps

3

Figure 2: Maps of two subjects in the process of registration: (a) Left and right:
the axial and
sagittal views of the points in the two brains. The two central columns show plots of the ﬁrst
three dimensions of the embedding in the functional geometry after coarse rotational alignment. (b)
During alignment, a maps is represented as a Gaussian mixture model. The colors in both plots
indicate clusters which are only used for visualization.

into account. The transition probabilities are based on the functional connectivity of pairs of nodes.
Thus the diffusion distance integrates the connectivity values over possible paths that connect two
points and deﬁnes a geometry that captures the entirety of the connectivity structure. It corresponds
Dt (k , l) = X
to the operator P t parameterized by the diffusion time t:
where π(i) = g(i)P
(pt (k , i) − pt (l, i))2
u g(u) .
π(i)
i=1,...,N
The distance Dt is low if there is a large number of paths of length t with high transition probabilities
between the nodes k and l.
The diffusion distance corresponds to the Euclidean distance in the embedding space: kΨt (k) −
Ψt (l)k = Dt (k , l). The functional relations between fMRI signals are translated into spatial dis-
tances in the functional geometry [14]. This particular embedding method is closely related to other
spectral embedding approaches [17]; the parameter t controls the range of graph nodes that inﬂuence
a certain local conﬁguration.
To facilitate notation, we assume the diffusion time t is ﬁxed in the remainder of the paper, and omit
it from the equations. The resulting maps are the basis for the functional registration of the fMRI
volumes.

(4)

3 Functional geometry alignment

Let Ψ0 , and Ψ1 be the functional maps of two subjects. Ψ0 , and Ψ1 are point clouds embedded in
a w-dimensional Euclidean space. The points in the maps correspond to voxels and registration of
the maps establishes correspondences between brain regions of the subjects. Our goal is to estimate
correspondences of points in the two maps based on the structure in the two distributions determined
by the functional connectivity structure in the data. We perform registration in the functional space
by non-rigidly deforming the distributions until their overlap is maximized. At the same time, we
regularize the deformation so that high frequency displacements of individual points, which would
correspond to a change in the relations with strong connectivity, are penalized.

4

Subject 1Map 1Map 2Subject 2Ψ0Ψ1s0s1xk0xl1a. Maps of two subjectsb. Aligning the point setsWe note that the embedding is deﬁned up to rotation, order and sign of individual coordinate axes.
However, for successful alignment it is essential that the embedding is consistent between the sub-
jects, and we have to match the nuisance parameters of the embedding during alignment. In [19]
a greedy method for sign matching was proposed. In our data the following procedure produces
satisfying results. When computing the embedding, we set the sign of each individual coordinate
axis j so that mean({Ψj (k)}) − median({Ψj (k)}) > 0, ∀j = 1, . . . , w . Since the distributions
typically have a long tail, and are centered at the origin, this step disambiguates the coordinate axis
directions well.
Fig. 2 illustrates the level of consistency of the maps across two subjects. It shows the ﬁrst three
dimensions of maps for two different control subjects. The colors illustrate clusters in the map and
their corresponding positions in the brain. For illustration purposes the colors are matched based on
the spatial location of the clusters. The two maps indicate that there is some degree of consistency
of the mappings for different subjects.
Eigenvectors may switch if the corresponding eigenvalues are similar [13]. We initialise the registra-
tion using Procrustes analysis [4] so that the distance between a randomly chosen subset of vertices
from the same anatomical part of the brain is minimised in functional space. This typically resolves
ambiguity in the embedding with respect to rotation and the order of eigenvectors in the functional
space.
We employ the Coherent Point Drift algorithm for the subsequent non-linear registration of the
  N1X
(cid:21)!
functional maps [16]. We consider the points in Ψ0 to be centroids of a Gaussian mixture model
(cid:20)
E (χ) = − N0X
that is ﬁtted to the points in Ψ1 to minimize the energy
0 − χ(xl
1 )k2
− kxk
+ λ
2 φ(χ),
2σ2
l=1
k=1
1 are the points in the maps Ψ0 and Ψ1 during matching and φ is a function that
where xk
0 and xl
regularizes the deformation χ of the point set. The minimization of E (χ) involves a trade-off be-
tween its two terms controlled by λ. The ﬁrst term is a Gaussian kernel, that generates a continuous
distribution for the entire map Ψ0 in the functional space Rw . By deforming xk
0 we increase the
likelihood of the points in Ψ1 with respect to the distribution deﬁned by xk
0 . At the same time
φ(χ) encourages a smooth deformation ﬁeld by penalizing high frequency local deformations by
e.g., a radial basis function [15]. The ﬁrst term in Eq. 5 moves the two point distributions so that
their overlap is maximized. That is, regions that exhibit similar global connectivity characteristics
are moved closer to each other. The regularization term induces a high penalty on changing strong
functional connectivity relationships among voxels (which correspond to small distances or clusters
in the map). At the same time, the regularization allows more changes between regions with weak
connectivity (which correspond to large distances). In other words, it preserves the connectivity
structure of strong networks, while being ﬂexible with respect to weak connectivity between distant
clusters.
Once the registration of the two distributions in the functional geometry is completed, we assign
correspondences between points in Ψ0 and Ψ1 by a simple matching algorithm that for any point in
one map chooses the closest point in the other map.

log

exp

(5)

4 Validation of Alignment

To validate the functional registration quantitatively we align pairs of subjects via (i) the proposed
functional geometry alignment, and (ii) the anatomical non-rigid demons registration [25, 28]. We
restrict the functional evaluation to the grey matter. Functional geometry embedding is performed on
a random sampling of 8000 points excluding those that exhibit no activation (with a liberal threshold
of p = 0.15 in the General Linear Model (GLM) analysis [12]). After alignment we evaluate the
quality of the ﬁt by (1) the accuracy of predicting the location of the active areas in the target subject
and (2) the inter-subject correlation of BOLD signals after alignment. The ﬁrst criterion is directly
related to the clinical aim of localization of active areas.
A. Predictive power: We evaluate if it is possible to establish correspondences, so that the activation
in one subject lets us predict the activation in another subject after alignment. That is, we examine
if the correspondences identify regions that exhibit a relationship with the task (in our experiment, a

5

Figure 3: Mapping a region by functional geometry alignment: a reference subject (ﬁrst column)
aligned to a tumor patient (second and third columns, the tumor is shown in blue). The green
region in the healthy subject is mapped to the red region by the proposed functional registration
and to the yellow region by anatomical registration. Note that the functional alignment places the
region narrowly around the tumor location, while the anatomical registration result intersects with
the tumor. The slice of the anatomical scan with the tumor and the zoomed visualization of the
registration results (fourth column) are also shown.

language task) even if they are ambiguous or not detected based on the standard single-subject GLM
analysis. That is, can we transfer evidence for the activation of speciﬁc regions between subjects,
for example between healthy controls and tumor patients? In the following we refer to regions
detected by the standard single subject fMRI analysis with an activation threshold of p = 0.05 (false
discovery rate (FDR) corrected [1]) as above-threshold regions.
We validate the accuracy of localizing activated regions in a target volume by measuring the average
correlation of the t-maps (based on the standard GLM) between the source and the corresponding
target regions after registration. A t-map indicates activation - i.e., a signiﬁcant correlation with the
task the subject is performing during fMRI acquisition - for each voxel in the fMRI volume. A high
inter-subject correlation of the t-maps indicates that the aligned source t-maps are highly predictive
of the t-map in the target fMRI data. Additionally, we measure the overlap between regions in
the target image to which the above-threshold source regions are mapped, and the above-threshold
regions in the target image. Note that for the registration itself neither the inter-subject correlation of
fMRI signals, nor the correlation of t-maps is used. In other words, although we enforce homology
in the pattern of correlations between two subjects, the correlations across subjects per se are not
matched.
B. Correlation of BOLD signal across subjects: To assess the relationship between the source
and registered target regions relative to the fMRI activation, we measure the correlation between the
fMRI signals in the above-threshold regions of the source volume and the fMRI signals at the corre-
sponding locations in the target volume. Across-subject correlation of the fMRI signals indicates a
relationship between the underlying functional processes. We are interested in two speciﬁc scenar-
ios: (i) above-threshold regions in the target image that were matched to above-threshold regions in
the source image, and (ii) below-threshold regions in the target image that were matched to above-
threshold regions in the source image. This second group includes candidates for activation, even
though they do not pass detection threshold in the particular volume. We do not expect correlation
of signals for non-activated regions.

5 Experimental Results

We demonstrate the method on a set of 6 control subjects and 3 patients with low-grade tumors in
one of the regions associated with language processing. For all 9 subjects fMRI data was acquired

6

Reference - healthy control subjectTarget  - patient with tumor indicated in bluefMRI points in the reference subjectCorresponding fMRI points in the target - Functional Geometry AlignmentCorresponding fMRI points in the target - Anatomical RegistrationFigure 4: Validation: A. Correlation distribution of corresponding t-values after functional geometry
alignment (FGA) and anatomical registration (AR) for control-control and control-tumor matches.
B. correlation of the BOLD signals for activated regions mapped to activated regions (left) and
activated regions mapped to sub-threshold regions (right).

using a 3T GE Signa system (TR=2s, TE=40ms, ﬂip angle=90◦ , slice gap=0mm, FOV=25.6cm,
dimension 128 × 128 × 27 voxels, voxel size of 2 × 2 × 4 mm3 ). The language task (antonym
generation) block design was 5min 10s, starting with a 10s pre-stimulus period. Eight task and
seven rest blocks each 20s long alternated in the design. For each subject, anatomical T1 MRI data
was acquired and registered to the functional data. We perform pair-wise registration in all 36 image
pairs, 21 of which include at least one patient.
Fig.3 illustrates the effect of a tumor in a language region, and the corresponding registration results.
An area of the brain associated with language is registered from a control subject to a tumor patient.
The location of the tumor is shown in blue; the regions resulting from functional and anatomical reg-
istration are indicated in red (FGA), and yellow (AR), respectively. While anatomical registration
creates a large overlap between the mapped region and the tumor, functional geometry alignment
maps the region to a plausible area narrowly surrounding the tumor. Fig. 4 reports quantitative com-
parison of functional alignment vs. anatomical registration for the entire set of subjects. Functional
geometry alignment achieves signiﬁcantly higher correlation of t-values than anatomical registration
(0.14 vs. 0.07, p < 10−17 , paired t-test, all image pairs). Anatomical registration performance drops
signiﬁcantly when registering a control subject and a tumor patient, compared to a pair of control
subjects (0.08 vs. 0.06, p = 0.007). For functional geometry alignment this drop is not signiﬁcant
(0.15 vs. 0.14, p = 0.17). Functional geometry alignment predicts 50% of the above-threshold in
the target brain, while anatomical registration predicts 29% (Fig. 4 (A)).
These ﬁndings indicate that the functional alignment of language regions among source and tar-
get subjects is less affected by the presence of a tumor and the associated reorganization than the
matching of functional regions by anatomical registration. Furthermore the functional alignment
has better predictive power for the activated regions in the target subject for both control-control and
control-patient pairs. In our experiments this predictive power is affected onyl to a small degree by
a tumor presence in the target. In contrast and as expected, the matching of functional regions by
anatomical alignment is affected by the tumor.
Activated source regions mapped to a target subject exhibit the following characteristics. If both
source region and corresponding target region are above-threshold the average correlation between
the source and target signals is signiﬁcantly higher for functional geometry alignment (0.108 vs.
0.097, p = 0.004 paired t-test). For above-threshold regions mapped to below-threshold regions the
same signiﬁcant difference exists (0.020 vs. 0.016, p = 0.003), but correlations are signiﬁcantly
lower. This signiﬁcant difference between functional geometry alignment and anatomical registra-
tion vanishes for regions mapped from below-threshold regions in the source subject. The baseline
of below-threshold region pairs exhibits very low correlation (∼ 0.003) and no difference between
the two methods.
The fMRI signal correlation in the source and the target region is higher for functional alignment
if the source region is activated. This suggests that even if the target region does not exhibit task
speciﬁc behavior detectable by standard analysis, its fMRI signal still correlates with the activated
source fMRI signal to a higher degree than non-activated region pairs. The functional connectivity

7

00.050.10.150.21234FGAA. Correlation of t-mapsControl - ControlControl - Tumor00.050.10.150.2FGAARAR00.050.10.151256B. Correlation of fMRI signal00.050.10.15Activ. to Non-Activ. Activ. to Activ. FGAFGAARAR?Above-threshold region in source subjectAbove-threshold region in target subjectRegion corresponding to above-threshold region in source subject after alignment BOLD signal in source subjectBOLD signal at corresponding position after alignment of target subjectA.B.structure is sufﬁciently consistent to support an alignment of the functional geometry between sub-
jects. It identiﬁes experimental correspondences between regions, even if their individual relation-
ship to the task is ambiguous. We demonstrate that our alignment improves inter-subject correlation
for activated source regions and their target regions, but not for the non-active source regions. This
suggest that we enable localization of regions that would not be detected by standard analysis, but
whose activations are similar to the source regions in the normal subjects.

6 Conclusion

In this paper we propose and demonstrate a method for registering neuroanatomy based on the
functional geometry of fMRI signals. The method offers an alternative to anatomical registration;
it relies on matching a spectral embedding of the functional connectivity patterns of two fMRI
volumes. Initial results indicate that the structure in the diffusion map that reﬂects functional con-
nectivity enables accurate matching of functional regions. When used to predict the activation in a
target fMRI volume the proposed functional registration exhibits higher predictive power than the
anatomical registration. Moreover it is more robust to pathologies and the associated changes in
the spatial organization of functional areas. The method offers advantages for the localization of
activated but displaced regions in cases where tumor-induced changes of the hemodynamics make
direct localization difﬁcult. Functional alignment contributes evidence from healthy control sub-
jects. Further research is necessary to evaluate the predictive power of the method for localization
of speciﬁc functional areas.
Acknowledgements This work was funded in part by the NSF IIS/CRCNS 0904625 grant, the
NSF CAREER 0642971 grant, the NIH NCRR NAC P41-RR13218, NIH NIBIB NAMIC U54-
EB005149, NIH U41RR019703, and NIH P01CA067165 grants, the Brain Science Foundation, and
the Klarman Family Foundation.

References
[1] Y. Benjamini and Y. Hochberg. Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful
approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodologi-
cal), pages 289–300, 1995.
[2] S.B. Bonelli, R.H.W. Powell, M. Yogarajah, R.S. Samson, M.R. Symms, P.J. Thompson, M.J.
Koepp, and J.S. Duncan. Imaging memory in temporal lobe epilepsy: predicting the effects of
temporal lobe resection. Brain, 2010.
[3] S. Bookheimer. Pre-surgical language mapping with functional magnetic resonance imaging.
Neuropsychology Review, 17(2):145–155, 2007.
[4] F.L. Bookstein. Two shape metrics for biomedical outline data: Bending energy, procrustes
In Proceedings International
distance, and the biometrical modeling of shape phenomena.
Conference on Shape Modeling and Applications, pages 110 –120, 1997.
[5] Fan R.K. Chung. Spectral Graph Theory. American Mathematical Society, 1997.
[6] Ronald R. Coifman and St ´ephane Lafon. Diffusion maps. App. Comp. Harm. An., 21:5–30,
2006.
[7] Bryan Conroy, Ben Singer, James Haxby, and Peter Ramadge. fmri-based inter-subject cortical
alignment using functional connectivity. In Adv. in Neural Information Proc. Systems, pages
378–386, 2009.
[8] E. Fedorenko and N. Kanwisher. Neuroimaging of Language: Why Hasn’t a Clearer Picture
Emerged? Language and Linguistics Compass, 3(4):839–865, 2009.
[9] B. Fischl, M.I. Sereno, and A.M. Dale. Cortical surface-based analysis II: Inﬂation, ﬂattening,
and a surface-based coordinate system. Neuroimage, 9(2):195–207, 1999.
[10] B. Fischl, M.I. Sereno, R.B.H. Tootell, and A.M. Dale. High-resolution intersubject averaging
and a coordinate system for the cortical surface. HBM, 8(4):272–284, 1999.
[11] KJ Friston, CD Frith, P. Fletcher, PF Liddle, and RSJ Frackowiak. Functional topography:
multidimensional scaling and functional connectivity in the brain. Cerebral Cortex, 6(2):156,
1996.

8

[12] KJ Friston, AP Holmes, KJ Worsley, JB Poline, CD Frith, RSJ Frackowiak, et al. Statistical
parametric maps in functional imaging: a general linear approach. Hum Brain Mapp, 2(4):189–
210, 1995.
In Shape
[13] V. Jain and H. Zhang. Robust 3D shape correspondence in the spectral domain.
Modeling and Applications, 2006. SMI 2006. IEEE International Conference on, page 19.
IEEE, 2006.
[14] Georg Langs, Dimitris Samaras, Nikos Paragios, Jean Honorio, Nelly Alia-Klein, Dardo
Tomasi, Nora D Volkow, and Rita Z Goldstein. Task-speciﬁc functional brain geometry from
model maps. In Proc. of MICCAI, volume 11, pages 925–933, 2008.
[15] A. Myronenko and X. Song. Point set registration: Coherent point drift. IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2010.
[16] A. Myronenko, X. Song, and M.A. Carreira-Perpin ´an. Non-rigid point set registration: Coher-
ent Point Drift. Adv. in Neural Information Proc. Systems, 19:1009, 2007.
[17] H.J. Qiu and E.R. Hancock. Clustering and Embedding Using Commute Times. IEEE TPAMI,
29(11):1873–1890, 2007.
[18] M.R. Sabuncu, B.D. Singer, B. Conroy, R.E. Bryan, P.J. Ramadge, and J.V. Haxby. Function-
based intersubject alignment of human cortical anatomy. Cerebral Cortex, 20(1):130–140,
2010.
[19] L.S. Shapiro and J. Michael Brady. Feature-based correspondence: an eigenvector approach.
Image and vision computing, 10(5):283–288, 1992.
[20] D. Shen and C. Davatzikos. HAMMER: hierarchical attribute matching mechanism for elastic
registration. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging, 21(11):1421–1439, 2002.
[21] J. Talairach and P. Tournoux. Co-planar stereotaxic atlas of the human brain. Thieme New
York, 1988.
[22] B. Thirion, G. Flandin, P. Pinel, A. Roche, P. Ciuciu, and J.B. Poline. Dealing with the short-
comings of spatial normalization: Multi-subject parcellation of fMRI datasets. Human brain
mapping, 27(8):678–693, 2006.
[23] B. Thirion, P. Pinel, S. M ´eriaux, A. Roche, S. Dehaene, and J.B. Poline. Analysis of a
large fMRI cohort: Statistical and methodological issues for group analyses. Neuroimage,
35(1):105–120, 2007.
[24] Bertrand Thirion, Silke Dodel, and Jean-Baptiste Poline. Detection of signal synchronizations
in resting-state fmri datasets. Neuroimage, 29(1):321–327, 2006.
[25] J.P. Thirion.
Image matching as a diffusion process: an analogy with Maxwell’s demons.
Medical Image Analysis, 2(3):243–260, 1998.
[26] D.C. Van Essen, H.A. Drury, J. Dickson, J. Harwell, D. Hanlon, and C.H. Anderson. An
integrated software suite for surface-based analyses of cerebral cortex. Journal of the American
Medical Informatics Association, 8(5):443, 2001.
[27] U. Von Luxburg. A tutorial on spectral clustering. Statistics and Computing, 17(4):395–416,
2007.
[28] H. Wang, L. Dong, J. O’Daniel, R. Mohan, A.S. Garden, K.K. Ang, D.A. Kuban, M. Bonnen,
J.Y. Chang, and R. Cheung. Validation of an accelerated’demons’ algorithm for deformable
image registration in radiation therapy. Physics in Medicine and Biology, 50(12):2887–2906,
2005.

9

