Game theoretic algorithms for Protein-DNA binding

Luis P ´erez-Breva
CSAIL-MIT
lpbreva@csail.mit.edu

Luis E. Ortiz
CSAIL - MIT
leortiz@csail.mit.edu

Chen-Hsiang Yeang
UCSC
chyeang@soe.ucsc.edu

Tommi Jaakkola
CSAIL - MIT
tommi@csail.mit.edu

Abstract

We develop and analyze game-theoretic algorithms for predicting coordinate bind-
ing of multiple DNA binding regulators. The allocation of proteins to local neigh-
borhoods and to sites is carried out with resource constraints while explicating
competing and coordinate binding relations among proteins with afﬁnity to the
site or region. The focus of this paper is on mathematical foundations of the ap-
proach. We also brieﬂy demonstrate the approach in the context of the λ-phage
switch.

1 Introduction

Transcriptional control relies in part on coordinate operation of DNA binding regulators and their
interactions with various co-factors. We believe game theory and economic models provide an
appropriate modeling framework for understanding interacting regulatory processes. In particular,
the problem of understanding coordinate binding of regulatory proteins has many game theoretic
properties. Resource constraints, for example, are critical to understanding who binds where. At low
nuclear concentrations, regulatory proteins may occupy only high afﬁnity sites, while ﬁlling weaker
sites with increasing concentration. Overlapping or close binding sites create explicit competition
for the sites, the resolution of which is guided by the available concentrations around the binding
sites. Similarly, explicit coordination such as formation of larger protein complexes may be required
for binding or, alternatively, binding may be facilitated by the presence of another protein. The key
advantage of games as models of binding is that they can provide causally meaningful predictions
(binding arrangements) in response to various experimental perturbations or disruptions.

Our approach deviates from an already substantial body of computational methods used for resolving
transcriptional regulation (see, e.g., [3, 10]). From a biological perspective our work is closest in
spirit to more detailed reaction equation models [5, 1], while narrower in scope. The mathematical
approach is nevertheless substantially different.

2 Protein-DNA binding

We decompose the binding problem into transport and local binding. By transport, we refer to the
mechanism that transports proteins to the neighborhood of sites to which they have afﬁnity. The
biological processes underlying the transport are not well-understood although several hypotheses
exist[12, 4]. We abstract the process initially by assuming separate afﬁnities for proteins to explore
neighborhoods of speciﬁc sites, modulated by whether the sites are available. This abstraction does
not address the dynamics of the transport process and therefore does not distinguish (nor stand in
contradiction to) underlying mechanisms that may or may not involve diffusion as a major com-

ponent. We aim to capture the differentiated manner in which proteins may accumulate in the
neighborhoods of sites depending on the overall nuclear concentrations and regardless of the time
involved.

Local binding, on the other hand, captures which proteins bind to each site as a consequence of
local accumulations or concentrations around the site or a larger region. In a steady state, the local
environment of the site is assumed to be closed and well-mixed. We therefore model the binding
as being governed by chemical equilibria: for a type of protein i around site j , {free protein i} +
{free site j} (cid:10) {bound ij}, where concentrations involving the site should be thought of as time
averages or averages across a population of cells depending on the type of predictions sought. The
concentrations of various molecular species around and bound to the sites as well as the rate at
which the sites are occupied are then governed by the law of mass action at chemical equilibrium:
[bound ij ]/([free protein i][free site j ]) = Kij , where i ranges over proteins with afﬁnity to site j
and Kij is a positive equilibrium constant characterizing protein i’s ability to bind to site j in the
absence of other proteins.

Broadly speaking, the combination of transport and local binding results in an arrangement of pro-
teins along the possible DNA binding sites. This is what we aim to predict with our game-theoretic
models, not how such arrangements are reached. The predictions should be viewed as functions of
the overall (nuclear) concentrations of proteins, the afﬁnities of proteins to explore neighborhoods
of individual sites, as well as the equilibrium constants characterizing the ability of proteins to bind
to speciﬁc sites when in close proximity. Any perturbation of such parameters leads to a potentially
different arrangement that we can predict.

3 Game Theoretic formulation

There are two types of players in our game, proteins and sites. A protein-player refers to a type
of protein, not an individual protein, and decides how its nuclear concentration is allocated to the
proximity of sites (transport process). The protein-players are assumed non-cooperative and rational.
In other words, their allocations are based on the transport afﬁnities and the availability of sites rather
than through some negotiation process involving multiple proteins. The non-coopeative nature of
the protein allocations does not, however, preclude the formation of protein complexes or binding
facilitated by other proteins. Such extensions can be incorporated at the sites.

Each possible binding site is associated with a site-player. Site-players choose the fraction of time
(or fraction of cells in a population) a speciﬁc type of protein is bound to the site. The site may also
remain empty. The strategies of the site-players are guided by local chemical equilibria. Indeed, the
site-players are introduced merely to reproduce this physical understanding of the binding process
in a game theoretic context. The site-players are non-cooperative and self-interested, always aiming
and succeeding at reproducing the local chemical equilibria.

The binding game has no global objective function that serves to guide how the players choose their
strategies. The players choices are instead guided by their own utilities that depend on the choices of
other players. For example, the protein-player allocates its nuclear concentration to the proximity of
the sites based on how occupied the sites are, i.e., in a manner that depends on the strategies of the
site-players. Similarly, the site-players reproduce the chemical equilibrium at the sites on the basis
of the available local protein concentrations, i.e., depending on the choices of the protein-players.

The predictions we can make based on the game theoretic formulation are equilibria of the game (not
to be confused with the local chemical equilibria at the sites). At an equilibrium, no reallocation of
proteins to sites is required and, conversely, the sites have reproduced the local chemical equilibria
based on the current allocations of proteins. While games need not have equilibria in pure strategies
(actions available to the players), our game will always have one.

4 The binding game

To specify the game more formally we proceed to deﬁne players’ strategies, their utilities, and the
j , where P
notion of an equilibrium of the game. To this end, let f i represent the (nuclear) concentration of
protein i. This is the amount of protein available to be allocated to the neighborhoods of sites. The
j = 1. The numerical values
fraction of protein i allocated to site j is speciﬁed by pi
j pi

j , where j ranges over the possible sites, deﬁne a possible strategy for the ith protein player.
of pi
The set of such strategies is denoted by P i . The choices of which strategies to play are guided by
parameters Eij , the afﬁnity of protein i to explore the neighborhood of site j (we will generally
index proteins with i and sites with j ). The utility for protein i, de ﬁned below, provides a numerical
ranking of possible strategy choices and is parameterized by Eij . Each player aims to maximize its
own utility over the set of possible strategy choices.
i are in principle observable from binding assays (cf. [9]). P
The strategy for site-player j speciﬁes the fraction of time that each type of protein is actually bound
is only one site and it may remain empty part of the time. The availability of site j is 1 − P
to the site. The strategy is denoted by sj
i , where i ranges over proteins with afﬁnity to the site. Note
i ≤ 1 since there
i.e., the fraction of time that nothing is bound. We will also use αj = P
that the values of sj
i sj
i ≤ 1,
i sj
i sj
i to denote how occupied
the site is. The utilities of the site players will depend on Kij , the chemical equilibrium constants
characterizing the local binding reaction between protein i and site j .
j Eij (1 − X
ui (pi , s) ≡ X
Utilities The utility function for protein-player i is formally de ﬁned as
where H (pi ) = − P
sj
i0 ) + βH (pi )
pi
i0
j
j log pi
j is the Shannon entropy of the strategy pi
j pi
j and j ranges over possible
sites. The utility of the protein-player essentially states that protein i “prefers” to be around sites
that are unbound and for which it has high afﬁnity. The parameter β ≥ 0 balances how much protein
allocations are guided by the differentiated process, characterized by the exploration afﬁnities Eij ,
that since the utility depends on the strategies of site-players through (1 − P
as opposed to allocated uniformly (maximizing the entropy function). Since the overall scaling of
the utilities is immaterial, only the ratios Eij /β are relevant for guiding the protein-players. Note
i0 sj
i0 ), one cannot ﬁnd
the equilibrium strategy for proteins by considering sj
i to be ﬁxed; the sites will respond to any pi
j
chosen by the protein-player.

(1)

(2)

As discussed earlier, the site-players always reproduce the chemical equilibrium between the site
h
i
i )(1 − X
and the protein species allocated to the neighborhood of the site. The utility for site-player i is
de ﬁned such that the maximizing strategy corresponds to the chemical equilibrium:
j f i − sj
sj
sj
= Kij
i0 )
(pi
i /
i0
speciﬁes the amount of free protein i, and the second term (1 − P
j f i − sj
where sj
(pi
i )
i speciﬁes how much protein i is bound, the ﬁrst term in the denominator
i0 sj
i0 ), the fraction of time the site
is available. The equilibrium equation holds for all protein species around the site and for the same
strategy {sj
i } of the site-player. The units of each “concentration ” in the above equation should be
(cid:16)
(cid:17)
vj (sj , p) ≡ X
1 − X
interpreted as numbers of available molecules (e.g., there’s only one site). The utility function that
reproduces this chemical equilibrium when maximized over possible strategies is given by
i − Kij (pi
j f i − sj
i )(1 − P
j f i , and P
sj
sj
i )
(3)
i0
i0
i
i ≤ Kij (pi
i0 ≤ 1. These constraints
j f i − sj
i ≤ pi
subject to sj
i0 sj
i0 sj
i0 ), sj
guarantee that the utility is always non-positive and zero exactly when the chemical equilibrium
i ≤ pi
holds. sj
j f i ensures that we cannot have more protein bound than is allocated to the proximity
j or S j (p). Note
of the site. These constraints deﬁne the set of strategies available for site-player
that the available strategies for the site-player depend on the current strategies for protein-players.
The set of strategies S j (p) is not convex.

4.1 The game and equilibria
The protein-DNA binding game is now fully speciﬁed by the set of parameters {Eij /β }, {Kij } and
{f i }, along with the utility functions {ui } and {vj } and the allocation constraints {P i } and {S j }.
We assume that the biological system being modeled reaches a steady state, at least momentarily,
preserving the average allocations. In terms of our game theoretic model, this corresponds to what

we call an equilibrium of the game. Informally, an equilibrium of a game is a strategy for each
player such that no individual has any incentive to unilaterally deviate from their strategy. Formally,
if the allocations ( ¯p, ¯s) are such that for each protein i and each site j ,
ui (pi , ¯s), and ¯sj ∈ arg max
¯pi ∈ arg max
vj (sj , ¯pj ),
sj ∈S j ( ¯pj )
pi∈P i
then we call ( ¯p, ¯s) an equilibrium of the protein-DNA binding game. Put another way, at an equilib-
rium, the current strategies of the players must be among the strategies that maximize their utilities
assuming the strategies of other players are held ﬁxed.

(4)

Does the protein-DNA binding game always have an equilibrium? While we have already stated
this in the afﬁrmative, we emphasize that there is no reason a priori to believe that there exists an
equilibrium in the pure strategies, especially since the sets of possible strategies for the site-players
are non-convex (cf. [2]). The existence is guaranteed by the following theorem:
Theorem 1. Every protein-DNA binding game has an equilibrium.

A constructive proof is provided by the algorithm discussed below. The theorem guarantees that at
least one equilibrium exists but there may be more than one. At any such equilibrium of the game, all
the protein species around each site are at a chemical equilibrium; that is, if ( ¯p, ¯s) is an equilibrium
of the game, then for all sites j and proteins i, ¯sj and ¯pi
j satisfy (2). Consequently, the site utilities
vj (¯sj , ¯pj ) are all zero for the equilibrium strategies.

4.2 Computing equilibria

The equilibria of the binding game represent predicted binding arrangements. Our game has special
structure and properties that permit us to ﬁnd an equilibrium efﬁciently through a simple iterative
algorithm. The algorithm monotonically ﬁlls the sites up to the equilibrium levels, starting with all
sites empty.
To this end, let αj = P
We begin by ﬁrst expressing any joint equilibrium strategy of the game as a function of how ﬁlled the
sites are, and reduce the problem of ﬁnding equilibria to ﬁnding ﬁxed points of a monotone function.
i0 sj
i0 denote site j occupancy, the fraction of time it is bound by any protein.
αj ’s are real numbers in the interval [0, 1]. If we ﬁx α = (α1 , . . . , αm ), i.e., the occupancies for all
the m sites, then we can readily obtain the maximizing strategies for proteins expressed as a function
j (α) ∝ exp(Eij (1 − αj )/β ), where the maximizing strategies are functions
in (2). By replacing αj = P
of site occupancies: pi
of α. Similarly, at the equilibrium, each site-player achieves a local chemical equilibrium speciﬁed
i0 , and solving for sj
i0 sj
i in (2), we get
i (α) = Kij (1 − αj )
sj
j (α) f i
1 + Kij (1 − αj ) pi
So, for example, the fraction of time the site is bound by a speciﬁc protein is proportional to the
amount of that protein in the neighborhood of the site, modulated by the equilibrium constant. Note
that sj
i (α) depends not only on how ﬁlled site
j is but also on how occupied the other sites are
j (α).
through pi
The equilibrium condition can be now expressed solely in terms of α and reduces to a simple con-
i (α) = X
αj = X
sistency constraint: overall occupancy should equal the fraction of time any protein is bound or
Kij (1 − αj )
sj
j (α) f i = Gj (α)
1 + Kij (1 − αj ) pi
the mapping Gj (α) = P
i
i
We have therefore reduced the problem of ﬁnding equilibria of the game to ﬁnding ﬁxed points of
i sj
i (α). This mapping, written explicitly as has a simple but powerful
monotonicity property that forms the basis for our iterative algorithm. Speciﬁcally,
Lemma 1. Let α−j denote all components αk except αj . Then for each j , Gj (α) ≡ Gj (αj , α−j )
is a strictly decreasing function of αj for any ﬁxed α−j .
We omit the proof as it is straightforward. This lemma, together with the fact that Gj (1, α−j ) = 0,
immediately guarantees that there is a unique solution to αj = Gj (αj , α−j ) for any ﬁxed and valid
α−j . The solution αj also lies in the interval [0, 1] and can be found efﬁciently via binary search.

(6)

(5)

The algorithm Let α(t) denote the site occupancies at the tth iteration of the algorithm. αj (t)
speciﬁes the j th component of this vector, while α−j (t) contains all but the j th component. The
algorithm proceeds as follows:
• Set αj (0) = 0 for all j = 1, . . . , m.
• Find each new component αj (t + 1), j = 1, . . . , m, on the basis of the corresponding
α−j (t) such that αj (t + 1) = Gj (αj (t + 1), α−j (t))
• Stop when αj (t + 1) ≈ αj (t) for all j = 1, . . . , m.
Note that the inner loop of the algorithm, i.e., ﬁnding αj (t + 1) on the basis of α−j (t) reduces
to a simple binary search as discussed earlier. The algorithm generates a monotonically increasing
sequence of α’s that converge to a ﬁxed point (equilibrium) solution.

We also provide a formal convergence analysis of the algorithm. To this end, we begin with the
following critical lemma.
Lemma 2. Let α1 and α2 be two possible assignments to α. If for all k 6= j , αk
1 ≤ αk
2 , then
−j
−j
1 ) ≤ Gj (αj , α
Gj (αj , α
2 ) for all αj .

−j
−j
The proof is straightforward and essentially based on the fact that α
appear only in the
and α
2
1
normalization terms for the protein allocations. We omit further details for brevity. On the basis of
this lemma, we can show that the algorithm indeed generates a monotonically increasing sequence
of α’s
Theorem 2. αj (t + 1) ≥ αj (t) for all j and t.
Proof. By induction. Since αj (0) = 0 and the range of Gj (αj , α−j (0)) lies in [0, 1], clearly
αj (1) ≥ αj (0) for all j . Assume then that αj (t) ≥ αj (t − 1) for all j . We extend the induc-
tion step by contradiction. Suppose αj (t + 1) < αj (t) for some j . Then
αj (t + 1) < αj (t) = Gj (αj (t), α−j (t − 1)) ≤ Gj (αj (t), α−j (t))
< Gj (αj (t + 1), α−j (t)) = αj (t + 1)
which is a contradiction. The ﬁrst “ ≤” follows from the induction hypothesis and lemma 2, and the
last “ <” derives from lemma 1 and αj (t + 1) < αj (t).

Since αj (t) for any t will always lie in the interval [0, 1], and because of the continuity of
Gj (αj , α−j ) in the two arguments, the algorithm is guaranteed to converge to a ﬁxed point so-
lution. More formally, the Monotone Convergence Theorem for sequences and the continuity of
Gj ’s imply that
Theorem 3. The algorithm converges to a ﬁxed point ¯α such that ¯αj = Gj ( ¯αj , ¯α−j ) for all j .

4.3 The λ-phage binding game

We use the well-known λ-phage viral infection [11, 1] to illustrate the game theoretic approach.
A genetic two-state control switch speciﬁes whether the infection remains dormant (lysogeny) or
whether the viral DNA is aggressively replicated (lysis). The components of the λ−switch are 1)
two adjacent genes cI and Cro that encode cI2 and Cro proteins, respectively; 2) the promoter regions
PRM and PR of these genes, and 3) an operator (OR ) with three binding sites OR 1, OR 2, and OR 3.
We focus on lysogeny, in which cI2 dominates over Cro. There are two relevant protein-players,
RNA-polymerase and cI2 , and three sites, OR 1, OR 2, and OR 3 (arranged close together in this
order). Since the presence of cI2 in either OR 1 or OR 3 blocks the access of RNA-polymerase to the
promoter region PR , or PRM respectively, we can safely restrict ourselves to operator sites as the
site-players. There are three phases of operation depending on the concentration of cI2 :

1. cI2 binds to OR 1 ﬁrst and blocks the Cro promoter PR
2. Slightly higher concentrations of cI2 lead to binding at OR 2 which in turn facilitates RNA-
polymerase to initiate transcription at PRM
3. At sufﬁciently high levels cI 2 also binds to OR 3 and inhibits its own transcription

(a) OR 3

(b) OR 2

(c) OR 1

Figure 1: Predicted protein binding to sites OR 3, OR 2, and OR 1 for increasing amounts of cI2 . The rightmost
ﬁgure illustrates a comparison with [1]. The shaded area indicates the range of concentrations of cI2 at which
stochastic simulation predicts a decline in transcription from OR 1. Our model predicts that cI2 begins to occupy
OR 1 at the same concentration.

Game parameters The game requires three sets of parameters: chemical equilibrium constants,
afﬁnities, and protein concentrations. To use constants derived from experiment we assign units to
these quantities. We deﬁne f i as the total number of proteins i available, and arrange the units of
f i ≡ ef i VT NA ,
eKij = e−∆G/RT
Kij ≡ eKij /(NAVS )
Kij accordingly:
(7)
number, R is the universal gas constant, T is temperature, ef i is the concentration of protein i in the
where VT and VS are the volumes of cell and site neighborhood, respectively, NA is the Avogadro
cell, and eKij is the equilibrium constant in units of ‘/mol. As we show in [6] these deﬁnitions are
consistent with our previous derivation. Note that when game parameters are learned from data any
dependence on the volumes will be implicit. For a typical Escherichia coli ( 2µm length) at room
temperature, the Gibbs’ Free energies ∆G tabulated by [11] yield the equilibrium constants shown
below; in addition, we set transport afﬁnities in accordance with the qualitative description in [7, 8],

Kij
cI2
RNA-p

OR 3
.0020
.0212

OR 2
.0020
0

OR 1
.0296
.1134

Eij
cI2
RNA-p

OR 3 OR 2 OR 1
.1
.1
1
1
.01
.2

Note that the overall scaling of the afﬁnities is immaterial; only their relative values will guide the
protein-players. Note also that we have chosen not to incorporate any protein-protein interactions in
Finally, we set efRN A−p = 30nM (cf. [11]) (around fRN A−p ’ 340 copies for a typical E. coli).
the afﬁnities.
And varied fcI2 from 1 to 10, 000 copies to study the dynamical behavior of the lysogeny cycle. The
results are reported as a function of the ratio fcI2 /fRN A−p . We set β = 10−5 .
Simulation Results The predictions from the game theoretic model exactly mirror the known be-
havior. Here we summarize the main results and refer the reader to [6] for a thorough analysis.
Figure 1 illustrates how the binding at different sites changes as a function of increasing fcI2 . The
simulation mirrors the behavior of the lysogeny cycle discussed earlier. Although our model does
not capture dynamics, and ﬁgure 1 does not involve time, it is nevertheless useful for assessing
quantitative changes and the order of events as a function of increasing fcI2 . Note, for example,
that the levels at which cI2 occupies OR 1 and OR 2 rise much faster than at OR 3. While the result
is expected, the behavior is attributed to protein-protein interactions which are not encoded in our
model. Similarly, RNA-polymerase occupation at OR 3 bumps up as the probability that OR 2 is
bound by cI2 increases. In [6] we further discuss the implications of the simultaneous occupancy of
OR 1 and OR 2, via simulation of OR 1 knockout experiments.
Finally, ﬁgure 1(c) shows a comparison with stochastic simulation ( v. [1]). Our model predicts that
cI2 begins binding OR 1 at the same level as [1] predicts a decline in the transcription of Cro. While
consistent, we emphasize that the methods differ in their goals; stochastic simulation focuses on the
dynamics of transcription while we study the strategic allocation of proteins as a function of their
concentration.

10−110010110210300.250.50.751Binding in OR3f cI2/fRNA− pprobability of binding cI2RNA− polym.10−110010110210300.250.50.751Binding in OR2f cI2/fRNA− pprobability of binding cI2RNA− polym.10−110010110200.250.50.751Binding in OR1f cI2/fRNA− pprobability of binding cI2RNA− polym.4.4 A structured extension

The game theoretic formulation of the binding problem described previously involves a transport
mechanism that is speciﬁc to individual sites. In other words, proteins are allocated to the proximity
of sites based on parameters Eij and occupancies αj associated with individual sites. We generalize
the game further here by assuming that the transport mechanism has a coarser spatial structure, e.g.,
speciﬁc to promoters (regulatory regions of genes) rather than sites. In this extension the amount
of protein allocated to any promoter is shared by the sites it contains. The sharing creates speciﬁc
challenges to the algorithms for ﬁnding the equilibria and we will address those challenges here.
Let R represent possible promoter regions each of which may be bound by multiple proteins (at
distinct or overlapping sites). Let pi = {pi
r }r∈R represent an allocation of protein i into these
ui (pi ) = X
regions in a manner that is not speciﬁc to the possible sites within each promoter. The utility for
protein i is given by
where N (r) is the set of possible binding sites within promoter region r and ar = P
r Eir (ar ) + βH (pi )
pi
r∈R
is the overall occupancy of the promoter (how many proteins bound). As before, αj = P
j∈N (r) αj
i∈P sj
i ,
where the summation is over proteins. N (r) ∩ N (r 0 ) = ∅ whenever r 6= r 0 (promoters don’t
share sites). We assume only that Eir (ar ) is a decreasing and a differentiable function of ar . The
ar = P
protein utility is based on the assumption that the attraction to the promoter decreases based on the
number of proteins already bound at the promoter. The maximizing strategy for protein i given
r (a) ∝ exp(Eir (ar )/β ), where a = {ar }r∈R .
j∈N (r) αj for all r , is pi
h
i
r (a) − P
Sites j ∈ N (r) within a promoter region r reproduce the following chemical equilibrium
i )(1 − αj )
sj
(f ipi
= Kij
k∈N (r) sk
i /
for all proteins i ∈ P . Note the shared protein resource within the promoter. We can ﬁnd this
αj = X
1 + P
chemical equilibrium by solving the following ﬁxed point equations
Kij (1 − αj )
r (α, a−r )
r (a) = Gj
k∈N (r) Kik (1 − αk ) f ipi
i∈P
The site occupancies αj are now tied within the promoter as well as in ﬂuencing the overall allocation
of proteins across different promoters through a = {ar }r∈R . The following theorem provides the
basis for solving the coupled ﬁxed point equations:
Theorem 4. Let { ˆαj
1 } be the ﬁxed point solution αj
1 ) and { ˆαj
2 } the solution to
r (α1 , a−r
1 = Gj
1 ≤ ˆar
2 for all l 6= r then ˆar
1 ≤ al
r (α2 , a−r
αj
2 ). If al
2 = Gj
2 .
The proof is not straightforward but we omit it for brevity (two pages). The result guarantees that if
we can solve the ﬁxed point equations within each promoter then the overall occupancies {ar }r∈R
have the same monotonicity property as in the simpler version of the game where ar consisted of a
single site. In other words, any algorithm that successively solves the ﬁxed point equations within
promoters will result in a monotone and therefore convergent ﬁlling of the promoters, beginning
with all empty promoters.
We will redeﬁne the notation slightly to illustrate the algorithm for ﬁnding the solution
r (αj , α−j , ¯αj , a−r ) = X
r (α, a−r ) for j ∈ N (r) where a−r is ﬁxed. Speciﬁcally, let
Gj
1 + Kij (1 − αj ) + P
Kij (1 − αj )
r (αj , ¯α−j , a−r )
k 6=j Kik (1 − αk ) f ipi
Gj
i∈P
In other words, the ﬁrst argument refers to αj anywhere on the right hand side, the second argument
refers to α−j in the denominator of the ﬁrst expression in the sum, and the third argument refers to
r (·). The algorithm is now deﬁned as follows: initialize by setting αj (0) = 0 and ¯αj (0) = 1
α−j in pi
for all j ∈ N (r), then
r ( ˆαj , ¯α−j (t), α−j (t), a−r ) separately for each
Iteration t, upper bounds: Find ˆαj = Gj
j ∈ N (t). Update ¯αj (t + 1) = ˆαj , j ∈ N (r)

αj =

r ( ˆαj , α−j (t), ¯α−j (t + 1), a−r ) separately for each
Iteration t, lower bounds: Find ˆαj = Gj
j ∈ N (r). Update αj (t + 1) = ˆαj , j ∈ N (r)
The iterative optimization proceeds until1 ¯αj (t) − αj (t) ≤  for all j ∈ N (r). The algorithm
¯αj (t + 1) ≤
successively narrows down the gap between upper and lower bounds. Speciﬁcally,
¯αj (t) and αj (t + 1) ≥ αj (t). The fact that these indeed remain upper and lower bounds follows
r (·, α−j , ¯αj , a−r ), viewed as a function of the ﬁrst argument, increases
directly from the fact that Gj
uniformly as we increase the components of the second argument. Similarly, it uniformly decreases
as a function of the third argument.

5 Discussion

We have presented a game theoretic approach to predicting protein arrangements along the DNA.
The model is complete with convergent algorithms for ﬁnding equilibria on a genome-wide scale.
The results from the small scale application are encouraging. Our model successfully reproduces
known behavior of the λ−switch on the basis of molecular level competition and resource con-
straints, without the need to assume protein-protein interactions between cI2 dimers and cI2 and
RNA-polymerase. Even in the context of this well-known sub-system, however, few quantitative
experimental results are available about binding (see the comparison). Proper validation and use of
our model therefore relies on estimating the game parameters from available protein-DNA binding
data. This will be addressed in subsequent work.

This work was supported in part by NIH grant GM68762 and by NSF ITR grant 0428715. Luis
P ´erez-Breva is a “Fundaci
´on Rafael del Pino” Fellow.

References
[1] Adam Arkin, John Ross, and Harley H. McAdams. Stochastic kinetic analysis of developmental pathway
bifurcation in phage λ-infected escherichia coli cells. Genetics, 149:1633–1648, August 1998.
[2] Kenneth J. Arrow and Gerard Debreu. Existence of an equilibrium for a competitive economy. Econo-
metrica, 22(3):265–290, July 1954.
[3] Z. Bar-Joseph, G. Gerber, T. Lee, N. Rinaldi, J. Yoo, B. Gordon F. Robert, E. Fraenkel, T. Jaakkola,
R. Young, and D. Gifford. Computational discovery of gene modules and regulatory networks. Nature
Biotechnology, 21(11):1337–1342, 2003.
[4] Otto G. Berg, Robert B. Winter, and Peter H. von Hippel. Diffusion- driven mechanisms of protein
translocation on nucleic acids. 1. models and theory. Biochemistry, 20(24):6929–48, November 1981.
[5] HarleyH. McAdams and Adam Arkin. Stochastic mechanisms in geneexpression. PNAS, 94(3):814–819,
1997.
[6] Luis P ´erez-Breva, Luis Ortiz, Chen-Hsiang Yeang, and Tommi Jaakkola. DNA binding and games. Tech-
nical Report MIT-CSAIL-TR-2006-018, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Computer Science and
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory, March 2006.
[7] Mark Ptashne. A Genetic Switch: Gene control and phage λ. Cell Press AND Blackwell Scientiﬁc
Publications, 3rd edition, 1987.
[8] Mark Ptashne and Alexander Gann. Genes and Signals. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory press, 1st edition,
2002.
[9] Bing Ren, Franois Robert, John J. Wyrick, Oscar Aparicio, Ezra G. Jennings, Itamar Simon, Julia
Zeitlinger, Jrg Schreiber, Nancy Hannett, Elenita Kanin, Thomas L. Volkert, Christopher J. Wilson,
Stephen P. Bell, , and Richard A. Young. Genome-wide location and function of DNA-binding proteins.
Science, 290(2306), December 2000.
[10] E. Segal, M. Shapira, A. Regev, D. Pe’er, D. Botstein, D. Koller, and N. Friedman. Module networks:
identifying regulatory modules and their condition-speciﬁc regulators from gene expression data. Nature
Genetics, 34(2):166–76, 2003.
[11] Madeline A. Shea and Gary K. Ackers. The or control system of bacteriophage lambda. a physical-
chemical model for gene regulation. Journal of Molecular Biology, 181:211–230, 1985.
[12] Neil P. Stanford, Mark D. Szczelkun, John F. Marko, and Stephen E. Halford. One- and three-dimensional
pathways for proteins to reach speciﬁc DNA sites. EMBO, 19(23):6546–6557, December 2000.

1 In the case of multiple equilibria the bounds might converge but leave a ﬁnite gap. The algorithm will
identify those cases as the monotone convergence of the bounds can be assessed separately.

