Reducing Calibration Time For Brain-Computer
Interfaces: A Clustering Approach

Matthias Krauledat1,2 , Michael Schr öder 2 , Benjamin Blankertz2 , Klaus-Robert Müller 1,2
1Technical University Berlin, Str. des 17. Juni 135, 10 623 Berlin, Germany
2 Fraunhofer FIRST.IDA, Kekuléstr. 7, 12 489 Berlin, Germany
{kraulem,schroedm,blanker,klaus}@first.fhg.de

Abstract

Up to now even subjects that are experts in the use of machine learning based
BCI systems still have to undergo a calibration session of about 20-30 min. From
this data their (movement) intentions are so far infered. We now propose a new
paradigm that allows to completely omit such calibration and instead transfer
knowledge from prior sessions. To achieve this goal we ﬁrst d e ﬁne normalized
CSP features and distances in-between. Second, we derive prototypical features
across sessions: (a) by clustering or (b) by feature concatenation methods. Finally,
we construct a classiﬁer based on these individualized prot otypes and show that,
indeed, classiﬁers can be successfully transferred to a new session for a number
of subjects.

1 Introduction

BCI systems typically require training on the subject side and on the decoding side (e.g. [1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7]). While some approaches rely on operant conditioning with extensive subject training
(e.g. [2, 1]), others, such as the Berlin Brain-Computer Interface (BBCI) put more emphasis on the
machine side (e.g. [4, 8, 9]). But when following our philosophy of ’letting the machines learn’, a
calibration session of approximately 20-30 min was so far required, even for subjects that are beyond
the status of BCI novices.
The present contribution studies to what extent we can omit this brief calibration period. In other
words, is it possible to successfully transfer information from prior BCI sessions of the same sub-
ject that may have taken place days or even weeks ago? While this question is of high practical
importance to the BCI ﬁeld, it has so far only been addressed i n [10] in the context of transfering
channel selection results from subject to subject. In contrast to this prior approach, we will focus
on the more general question of transfering whole classiﬁer s, resp. individualized representations
between sessions. Note that EEG (electroencephalogram) patterns typically vary strongly from one
session to another, due to different psychological pre-conditions of the subject. A subject might
for example show different states of fatigue and attention, or use diverse strategies for movement
imagination across sessions. A successful session to session transfer should thus capture generic
’invariant’ discriminative features of the BCI task.
For this we ﬁrst transform the EEG feature set from each prior
session into a ’standard’ format (sec-
tion 2) and normalize it. This allows to de ﬁne a consistent me asure that can quantify the distance
between representations. We use CSP-based classiﬁers (see section 3.1 and e.g. [11]) for the dis-
crimination of brain states; note that the line of thought presented here can also be pursued for other
feature sets resp. for classiﬁers. Once a distance function (section 3.2) is established in CSP ﬁlter
space, we can cluster existing CSP ﬁlters in order to obtain t he most salient prototypical CSP-type
ﬁlters for a subject across sessions (section 3.3). To this e nd, we use the IBICA algorithm [12, 13]
for computing prototypes by a robust ICA decomposition (section 3.3). We will show that these new
CSP prototypes are physiologically meaningful and furthermore are highly robust representations
which are less easily distorted by noise artifacts.

2 Experiments and Data

Our BCI system uses Event-Related (De-)Synchronization (ERD/ERS) phenomena [3] in EEG sig-
nals related to hand and foot imagery as classes for control. The term refers to a de – or increasing
band power in speciﬁc frequency bands of the EEG signal durin g the imagination of movements.
These phenomena are well-studied and consistently reproducible features in EEG recordings, and
are used as the basis of many BCI systems (e.g. [11, 14]). For the present study we investigate data
from experiments with 6 healthy subjects: aw (13 sessions), al (8 sessions), cm (4 sessions), ie (4
sessions), ay (5 sessions) and ch (4 sessions). These are all the subjects that participated in at least
4 BCI sessions. Each session started with the recording of calibration data, followed by a machine
learning phase and a feedback phase of varying duration. All following retrospective analyses were
performed on the calibration data only.
During the experiments the subjects were seated in a comfortable chair with arm rests. For the
recording of the calibration data every 4.5 –6 seconds one of 3 different visual stimuli was presented,
indicating a motor imagery task the subject should perform during the following 3 –3.5 seconds.
The randomized and balanced motor imagery tasks investigated for all subjects except ay were left
hand (l), right hand (r), and right foot (f ). Subject ay only performed left- and right hand tasks.
Between 120 and 200 trials were performed during the calibration phase of one session for each
motor imagery class.
Brain activity was recorded from the scalp with multi-channel EEG ampliﬁers using at least 64
channels. Besides EEG channels, we recorded the electromyogram (EMG) from both forearms and
the right lower leg as well as horizontal and vertical electrooculogram (EOG) from the eyes. The
EMG and EOG channels were exclusively used to ensure that the subjects performed no real limb
or eye movements correlated with the mental tasks. As their activity can directly (via artifacts) or
indirectly (via afferent signals from muscles and joint receptors) be re ﬂected in the EEG channels
they could be detected by the classiﬁer. Controlling EMG and EOG ensured that the classiﬁer
operated on true EEG signals only.

Data preprocessing and Classiﬁcation
The time series data of each trial was windowed from 0.5 seconds after cue to 3 seconds after cue.
The data of the remaining interval was band pass ﬁltered betw een either 9 Hz – 25 Hz or 10 Hz –
25 Hz, depending on the signal characteristics of the subject. In any case the chosen spectral interval
comprised the subject speciﬁc frequency bands that contain ed motor-related activity.
For each subject a subset of EEG channels was determined that had been recorded for all of the
subject’s sessions. These subsets typically contained 40 to 45 channels which were densely located
(according to the international 10-20 system) over the more central areas of the scalp (see scalp maps
in following sections). The EEG channels of each subject were reduced to the determined subset
before proceeding with the calculation of Common Spatial Patterns (CSP) for different (subject
speciﬁc) binary classiﬁcation tasks.
After projection on the CSP ﬁlters, the bandpower was estima ted by taking the logvariance over
time. Finally, a linear discriminant analysis (LDA) classiﬁer was applied to the best discriminable
two-class combination.

3 A closer look at the CSP parameter space

3.1 Introduction of Common Spatial Patterns (CSP)
The common spatial pattern (CSP) algorithm is very useful in calculating spatial ﬁlters for detecting
ERD/ERS effects ([15]) and can be applied to ERD-based BCIs, see [11]. It has been extended to
multi-class problems in [14], and further extensions and robustiﬁcations concerning a simultaneous
optimization of spatial and frequency ﬁlters were presente d in [16, 17, 18]. Given two distributions
in a high-dimensional space, the (supervised) CSP algorithm ﬁnds directions (i.e., spatial ﬁlters)
that maximize variance for one class and simultaneously minimize variance for the other class. Af-
ter having band-pass ﬁltered the EEG signals to the rhythms o f interest, high variance re ﬂects a
strong rhythm and low variance a weak (or attenuated) rhythm. Let us take the example of discrim-
inating left hand vs. right hand imagery. The ﬁltered signal corresponding to the desynchronization
of the left hand motor cortex is characterized by a strong motor rhythm during imagination of right
hand movements (left hand is in idle state), and by an attenuated motor rhythm during left hand
imagination. This criterion is exactly what the CSP algorithm optimizes: maximizing variance for

Distance Matrix
for 78 CSP Filters

Scatterplot MDS:
CSP Filters and 6 Prototypes

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

t
o
o
F

d
n
a
H
 
t
f
e
L

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

1.5

1

0.5

0

D
i
m
e
n
s
i
o
n
 
2

Dimension 1

Figure 1: Left: Non-euclidean distance matrix for 78 CSP ﬁlters of imagined left hand and foot movement.
Right: Scatterplot of the ﬁrst vs. second dimension of CSP ﬁlters af
ter Multi-Dimensional Scaling (MDS).
Filters that minimize the variance for the imagined left hand are plotted as red crosses, foot movement imagery
ﬁlters are shown as blue dots. Cluster centers detected by IB ICA are marked with magenta circles. Both ﬁgures
show data from al.

the class of right hand trials and at the same time minimizing variance for left hand trials. Further-
more the CSP algorithm calculates the dual ﬁlter that will fo cus on the area of the right hand and
it will even calculate several ﬁlters for both optimization s by considering the remaining orthogonal
subspaces.
Let Si be the covariance matrix of the trial-concatenated matrix of dimension [channels × con-
catenated time-points] belonging to the respective class i ∈ {1, 2}. The CSP analysis consists of
calculating a matrix Q and diagonal matrix D with elements in [0, 1] such that
QS1Q> = D
QS2Q> = I − D.
This can be solved as a generalized eigenvalue problem. The projection that is given by the i-th
row of matrix Q has a relative variance of di (i-th element of D) for trials of class 1 and relative
variance 1 − di for trials of class 2. If di is near 1 the ﬁlter given by the i-th row of Q maximizes
variance for class 1, and since 1 − di is near 0, minimizes variance for class 2. Typically one would
retain projections corresponding to the three highest eigenvalues di , i.e., CSP ﬁlters for class 1, and
projections corresponding to the three lowest eigenvalues, i.e., CSP ﬁlters for class 2.

and

(1)

3.2 Comparison of CSP ﬁlters
Since the results of the CSP algorithm are the solutions of a generalized eigenvalue problem, where
every multiple of an eigenvector is again a solution to the eigenvalue problem. If we want to compare
different CSP ﬁlters, we must therefore keep in mind that eve ry point on the line through a CSP ﬁlter
point and the origin can be identiﬁed (except for the origin i tself). More precisely, it is sufﬁcient to
consider only normalized CSP vectors on the (#channels-1)-dimensional hypersphere. This suggests
that the CSP space is inherently non-euclidean. As a more appropriate metric between two points c1
and c2 in this space, we calculated the angle between the two lines corresponding to these points.
c1 ∗ c2
|c1 | ∗ |c2 |
(ci )i≤n , one can generate the distance matrix
D = (m(ci , c j ))i, j≤n ,
which can then be used to ﬁnd prototypical examples of CSP ﬁlt
ers. Fig.1 shows an example of a
distance matrix for 78 CSP ﬁlters for the discrimination of t he variance during imagined left hand
movement and foot movement. Based on the left hand signals, three CSP ﬁlters showing the lowest

When applying this measure to a set of CSP ﬁlters

m(c1 , c2 ) = arccos(

)

y
t
i
r
a
l
i
m
i
s
s
i
D

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

Single Linkage Dendrogram

19

42

50

41

47

65

62

64

59

57

74

53

54

58

40

46

49

43

63

52

56

55

60

51

45

44

61

48

70

72

77

71

66

73

67

69

78

75

68

76

22

11

8 10

24

25

31

14

33

23

21

29

37

9 15

16

30

6

4 27

12

7

3 17

18

5 20

32

26

34

2 28

38

39

1 13

35

36

Prototypes

Figure 2: Dendrogram of a hierarchical cluster tree for the CSP ﬁlters of left hand movement imagery (dashed
red lines) and foot movement imagery (solid blue lines). Cluster centers detected by IBICA are used as CSP
prototypes. They are marked with magenta arrows.

eigenvalues were chosen for each of the 13 sessions. The same number of 3 × 13 ﬁlters were chosen
for the foot signals. The ﬁlters are arranged in groups accor ding to their relative magnitude of the
eigenvalues, i.e., ﬁlters with the largest eigenvalues are grouped together, then ﬁlters with the second
largest eigenvalues etc.
The distance matrix in Fig.1 shows a block structure which reveals that the ﬁlters of each group have
low distances amongst each other as compared to the distances to members of other groups. This is
especially true for ﬁlters for the minimization of variance in left hand trials.

3.3 Finding Clusters in CSP space
The idea to ﬁnd CSP ﬁlters that recur in the processing of diff
erent sessions of a single subject is
very appealing, since these ﬁlters can be re-used for efﬁcie
nt classiﬁcation of unseen data. As an
example of clustered parameters, Fig.2 shows a hierarchical clustering tree (see [19]) of CSP ﬁlters
of different sessions for subject al. Single branches of the tree form distinct clusters, which are
also clearly visible in a projection of the ﬁrst Multi-Dimen sional Scaling-Components in Fig.1 (for
MDS, see [20]).
The proposed metric of section 3.2 coincides with the metric used for Inlier-Based Independent
Component Analysis (IBICA, see [12, 13]). This method was originally intended to ﬁnd estimators
of the super-Gaussian source signals from a mixture of signals. By projecting the data onto the
hypersphere and using the angle distance, it has been demonstrated that the correct source signals can
be found even in high-dimensional data. The key ingredient of this method is the robust identiﬁcation
of inlier points as it can be done with the g-index (see [21]), which is de ﬁned as follows:
Let z ∈ {c1 , . . . , cn } be a point in CSP-space, and let nn1 (z), . . . , nnk (z) be the k nearest neighbors of
z, according to the distance m. We then call the average distance of z to its neighbors the g-index of
z, i.e.

g(z) =

1
k

m(z, nn j (z)).

k(cid:229)
j=1
If z lies in a densely populated region of the hypersphere, then the average distance to its neighbors
is small, whereas if it lies in a sparse region, the average distance is high. The data points with the
smallest g are good candidates for prototypical CSP ﬁlters since they a re similar to other ﬁlters in
the comparison set. This suggests that these ﬁlters are good solutions in a number of experiments
and are therefore robust against changes in the data such as outliers, variations in background noise
etc.

4 Competing analysis methods: How much training is needed?

Fig.3 shows an overview of the validation methods used for the algorithms under study. The left part
shows validation methods which mimick the following BCI scenario: a new session starts and no

Historical

New

Historical

New

Session 1 Session 2 Session 3 Session 4

Session 1 Session 2 Session 3 Session 4

CSP

10/20/30 Trials

CSP

LDA

Test

LDA

Test

CSP

LDA

Test

CSP

LDA

Test

CSP-Prototypes

CSP-Prototypes

LDA

Test

LDA

Test

CSP and CSP-Prototypes

CSP and CSP-Prototypes

Data:

Ordinary CSP:

HIST-CSP:

PROTO-CSP:

CONCAT-CSP:

LDA

Test

LDA

Test

Figure 3: Overview of the presented training and testing modes for the example of four available sessions. The
left part shows a comparison of ordinary CSP with three methods that do not require calibration. The validation
scheme in the right part compares CSP with three adaptive methods. See text for details.

data has been collected yet. The top row represents data of all sessions in original order. Later rows
describe different data splits for the training of the CSP ﬁl ters and LDA (both depicted in blue solid
lines) and for the testing of the trained algorithms on unseen data (green dashed lines). The ordinary
CSP method does not take any historical data from prior sessions into account (second row). It uses
training data only from the ﬁrst half of the current session. This serves as a baseline to show the
general quality of the data, since half of the session data is generally enough to train a classiﬁer that
is well adapted to the second half of the session. Note that this evaluation only corresponds to a real
BCI scenario where many calibration trials of the same day are available.

4.1 Zero training methods
This is contrasted to the following rows, which show the exclusive use of historic data in order
to calculate LDA and one single set of CSP ﬁlters from the coll ected data of all prior sessions
(third row), or calculate one set of CSP ﬁlters for each histo ric session and derive prototypical
ﬁlters from this collection as described in section 3.3 (fou rth row), or use a combination of row
three and four that results in a concatenation of CSP ﬁlters a nd derived CSP prototypes ( ﬁfth row).
Feature concatenation is an effective method that has been shown to improve CSP-based classiﬁers
considerably (see [22]).

4.2 Adaptive training methods
The right part of Fig.3 expands the training sets for rows three, four and ﬁve for the ﬁrst 10, 20 or 30
trials per class of the data of the new session. In the methods of row 4 and 5, only LDA pro ﬁts from
the new data, whereas CSP prototypes are calculated exclusively on historic data as before. This
approach is compared against the ordinary CSP approach that now only uses the same small amount
of training data from the new session.
This scheme, as well as the one presented in section 4.1, has been cross-validated such that each
available session was used as a test session instead of the last one.

5 Results

The underlying question of this paper is whether information gathered from previous experimental
sessions can prove its value in a new session. In an ideal case existing CSP ﬁlters and LDA classiﬁers
could be used to start the feedback phase of the new session immediately, without the need to collect
new calibration data.

Subjects
Classes
Ordinary CSP
HIST
PROTO
CONCAT
Sessions

aw
LF
5.0
10.1
9.9
8.9
13

al
RF
2.7
2.9
3.1
2.7
7

cm
LF
11.8
23.0
21.5
19.5
4

ie
LR
16.2
26.0
26.2
23.7
4

ay
LR
11.7
13.3
10.0
12.4
5

ch
LR
6.2
6.9
11.4
7.4
4

Table 1: Results of Zero-Training modes. All classi ﬁcation errors are given in %. While the ordinary CSP
method uses half of the new session for training, the three methods HIST, PROTO and CONCAT exclusively
use historic data for the calculation of CSP ﬁlters and LDA. ( as described on the left side of Fig.3). Amongst
them, CONCAT performs best in four of the six subjects. For subjects al, ay and ch its result is even comparable
to that of ordinary CSP.

]
%
[
 
r
o
r
r
E

20

18

16

14

12

10

8

Ordinary CSP
HIST−CSP
PROTO−CSP
CONCAT−CSP

0

20
10
Number of trials

30

Figure 4: Incorporating more and more data from the current session (10, 20 or 30 trials per class), the clas-
si ﬁcation error decreases for all of the four methods descri bed on the right side of Fig.3. The three methods
HIST, PROTO and CONCAT clearly outperform ordinary CSP. Interestingly the best zero-training method
CONCAT is only outperformed by ordinary CSP if the latter has a head start of 30 trials per class.

We checked for the validity of this scenario based on the data described in section 2. Table 1 shows
the classiﬁcation results for the different classiﬁcation methods under the Zero-training validation
scheme. For subjects al, ay and ch, the classiﬁcation error of CONCAT is of the same magnitude as
the ordinary (training-based) CSP-approach. For the other three subjects, CONCAT outperforms the
methods HISTand PROTO. Although the ideal case is not reached for every subject, the table shows
that our proposed methods provide a decent step towards the goal of Zero-training for BCI.
Another way to at least reduce the necessary preparation time for a new experimental session is to
record only very few new trials and combine them with data from previous sessions in order to get
a quicker start. We simulate this strategy by allowing the new methods HIST, PROTO and CONCAT
to take a look also on the ﬁrst 10, 20 or 30 trials per class of th e new session. The baseline to
compare their performance would be a BCI system trained only on these initial trials. In Fig. 4, this
comparison is depicted. Here the in ﬂuence of the number of in itial training trials becomes visible. If
no new data is available, the ordinary classiﬁcation approa ch of course can not produce any output,
whereas the history-based methods, e.g. CONCAT already generates a stable estimation of the class
labels. All methods gain performance in terms of smaller test errors as more and more trials are
added. Only after training on at least 30 trials per class, ordinary CSP reaches the classiﬁcation level
that CONCAT had already shown without any training data of the current session.
Fig.5 shows some prototypical CSP ﬁlters as detected by IBIC A clustering for subject al and left
hand vs. foot motor imagery. All ﬁlters have small support (i .e., many entries are close to 0), and
the few large entries are located on neurophysiologically important areas: Filters 1 –2 and 4 –6 cover
the motor cortices corresponding to imagined hand movements, while ﬁlter 3 focuses on the central
foot area. This shows that the cluster centers are spatial ﬁl ters that meet our neurophysiological ex-

CSP Prototype Filters

0.5

0

-0.5

1

2

3

4

5

6

Figure 5: First six CSP prototype ﬁlters determined by IBICA for al.

pectations, since they are able to capture the frequency power modulations over relevant electrodes,
while masking out unimportant or noisy channels.

6 Discussion and Conclusion

Advanced BCI systems (e.g. BBCI) recently aquired the ability to dispense with extensive subject
training and now allow to infer a blueprint of the subject’s volition from a short calibration session of
approximately 30 min. This became possible through the use of modern machine learning technol-
ogy. The next step along this line to make BCI more practical is to strive for zero calibration time.
Certainly it will not be realistic to achieve this goal for arbitrary BCI novices, rather in this study we
have concentrated on experienced BCI users (with 4 and more sessions) and discussed algorithms to
re-use their classiﬁers from prior sessions. Note that the c onstruction of a classiﬁer that is
invariant
against session to session changes, say, due to different vigilance, focus or motor imagination across
sessions is a hard task.
Our contribution shows that experienced BCI subjects do not necessarily need to perform a new
calibration period in a new experiment. By analyzing the CSP parameter space, we could reveal
an appropriate characterization of CSP ﬁlters. Finding clu sters of CSP parameters for old sessions,
novel prototypical CSP ﬁlters can be derived, for which the n europhysiological validity could be
shown exemplarily. The concatenation of these prototype ﬁl ters with some CSP ﬁlters trained on
the same amount of data results in a classiﬁer that not only pe rforms comparable to the presented
ordinary CSP approach (trained on a large amount of data from the same session) in half of the
subjects, but also outperforms ordinary CSP considerably when only few data points are at hand.
This means that experienced subjects are predictable to an extent that they do not require calibration
anymore.
We expect that these results can be even further optimized by e.g. hand selecting the ﬁlters for
PROTO, by adjusting for the distribution changes in the new session, e.g. by adapting the LDA as
presented in [23], or by applying advanced covariate-shift compensation methods like [24].
Future work will aim to extend the presented zero training idea towards BCI novices.

References

[1] J. R. Wolpaw, N. Birbaumer, D. J. McFarland, G. Pfurtscheller, and T. M. Vaughan, “Brain-
computer interfaces for communication and control”, Clin. Neurophysiol., 113: 767 –791,
2002.
[2] N. Birbaumer, A. K übler, N. Ghanayim, T. Hinterberger, J . Perelmouter, J. Kaiser, I. Iversen,
B. Kotchoubey, N. Neumann, and H. Flor, “The Though translat ion device (TTD) for Com-
pletly Paralyzed Patients”,
IEEE Trans. Rehab. Eng., 8(2): 190 –193, 2000.
[3] G. Pfurtscheller and F. H. L. da Silva, “Event-related EE G/MEG synchronization and desyn-
chronization: basic principles”, Clin. Neurophysiol., 110(11): 1842 –1857, 1999.
[4] B. Blankertz, G. Curio, and K.-R. M üller, “Classifying S ingle Trial EEG: Towards Brain Com-
puter Interfacing ”, in: T. G. Diettrich, S. Becker, and Z. Gh ahramani, eds., Advances in Neural
Inf. Proc. Systems (NIPS 01), vol. 14, 157 –164, 2002.
[5] L. Trejo, K. Wheeler, C. Jorgensen, R. Rosipal, S. Clanton, B. Matthews, A. Hibbs,
R. Matthews, and M. Krupka, “Multimodal Neuroelectric Inte rface Development”,
IEEE
Trans. Neural Sys. Rehab. Eng., (11): 199 –204, 2003.

[6] L. Parra, C. Alvino, A. C. Tang, B. A. Pearlmutter, N. Yeung, A. Osman, and P. Sajda, “Linear
spatial integration for single trial detection in encephalography ”, NeuroImage, 7(1): 223 –230,
2002.
[7] W. D. Penny, S. J. Roberts, E. A. Curran, and M. J. Stokes, “ EEG-Based Communication: A
Pattern Recognition Approach ”, IEEE Trans. Rehab. Eng., 8(2): 214 –215, 2000.
[8] B. Blankertz, G. Dornhege, M. Krauledat, K.-R. M üller, V . Kunzmann, F. Losch, and G. Curio,
“The Berlin Brain-Computer Interface: EEG-based communic ation without subject training ”,
IEEE Trans. Neural Sys. Rehab. Eng., 14(2), 2006, in press.
[9] G. Pfurtscheller, C. Neuper, C. Guger, W. Harkam, R. Ramoser, A. Schlögl, B. Obermaier, and
M. Pregenzer, “Current Trends in Graz Brain-computer Inter face (BCI) ”,
IEEE Trans. Rehab.
Eng., 8(2): 216 –219, 2000.
[10] M. Schr öder, T. N. Lal, T. Hinterberger, M. Bogdan, N. J. Hill, N. Birbaumer, W. Rosenstiel,
and B. Sch ölkopf, “Robust EEG Channel Selection Across Subj
ects for Brain Computer In-
terfaces”, EURASIP Journal on Applied Signal Processing, Special Issue: Trends in Brain
Computer Interfaces, 19: 3103 –3112, 2005.
[11] H. Ramoser, J. M üller-Gerking, and G. Pfurtscheller, “ Optimal spatial ﬁltering of single trial
EEG during imagined hand movement”, IEEE Trans. Rehab. Eng., 8(4): 441 –446, 2000.
[12] F. C. Meinecke, S. Harmeling, and K.-R. M üller, “Robust
ICA for Super-Gaussian Sources”,
in: C. G. Puntonet and A. Prieto, eds., Proc. Int. Workshop on Independent Component Analysis
and Blind Signal Separation (ICA2004), 2004.
[13] F. C. Meinecke, S. Harmeling, and K.-R. M üller, “Inlier
-based ICA with an application to
Int. J. of Imaging Systems and Technology, 2005.
super-imposed images”,
[14] G. Dornhege, B. Blankertz, G. Curio, and K.-R. M üller, “ Boosting bit rates in non-invasive
EEG single-trial classiﬁcations by feature combination an d multi-class paradigms”,
IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., 51(6): 993 –1002, 2004.
[15] Z. J. Koles and A. C. K. Soong, “EEG source localization:
implementing the spatio-temporal
decomposition approach ”, Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol., 107: 343 –352, 1998.
[16] G. Dornhege, B. Blankertz, M. Krauledat, F. Losch, G. Curio, and K.-R. M üller, “Combined
optimization of spatial and temporal ﬁlters for improving B rain-Computer Interfacing ”,
IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., 2006, accepted.
[17] S. Lemm, B. Blankertz, G. Curio, and K.-R. M üller, “Spat
io-Spectral Filters for Improved
Classiﬁcation of Single Trial EEG ”,
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., 52(9): 1541 –1548, 2005.
[18] R. Tomioka, G. Dornhege, G. Nolte, K. Aihara, and K.-R. M üller, “Optimizing Spectral Filter
for Single Trial EEG Classiﬁcation ”, in:
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer-Verlag
Heidelberg, 2006, to be presented at 28th Annual Symposium of the German Association for
Pattern Recognition (DAGM 2006).
[19] R. O. Duda, P. E. Hart, and D. G. Stork, Pattern Classiﬁcation , Wiley & Sons, 2nd edn., 2001.
[20] T. Cox and M. Cox, Multidimensional Scaling, Chapman & Hall, London, 2001.
[21] S. Harmeling, G. Dornhege, D. Tax, F. C. Meinecke, and K.-R. M üller, “From outliers to
prototypes: ordering data ”, Neurocomputing, 2006, in press.
[22] G. Dornhege, B. Blankertz, G. Curio, and K.-R. M üller, “ Combining Features for BCI ”, in:
S. Becker, S. Thrun, and K. Obermayer, eds., Advances in Neural Inf. Proc. Systems (NIPS
02), vol. 15, 1115 –1122, 2003.
[23] P. Shenoy, M. Krauledat, B. Blankertz, R. P. N. Rao, and K.-R. M üller, “Towards Adaptive
Classiﬁcation for BCI ”,
J. Neural Eng., 3: R13 –R23, 2006.
[24] S. Sugiyama and K.-R. M üller, “Input-Dependent Estima
Covariate Shift”, Statistics and Decisions, 2006, to appear.

tion of Generalization Error under

