Statistical Modeling of Images with
Fields of Gaussian Scale Mixtures

Eero. P. Simoncelli
Siwei Lyu
Howard Hughes Medical Institute
Center for Neural Science, and
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York University, New York, NY 10003

Abstract

The local statistical properties of photographic images, when represented in a
multi-scale basis, have been described using Gaussian scale mixtures (GSMs).
Here, we use this local description to construct a global ﬁ eld of Gaussian scale
mixtures (FoGSM). Speciﬁ cally, we model subbands of wavelet coeﬃcients as
a product of an exponentiated homogeneous Gaussian Markov random ﬁ eld
(hGMRF) and a second independent hGMRF. We show that parameter estima-
tion for FoGSM is feasible, and that samples drawn from an estimated FoGSM
model have marginal and joint statistics similar to wavelet coeﬃcients of pho-
tographic images. We develop an algorithm for image denoising based on the
FoGSM model, and demonstrate substantial improvements over current state-of-
the-art denoising method based on the local GSM model.

Many successful methods in image processing and computer vision rely on statistical models for
images, and it is thus of continuing interest to develop improved models, both in terms of their ability
to precisely capture image structures, and in terms of their tractability when used in applications.
Constructing such a model is diﬃcult, primarily because of the intrinsic high dimensionality of the
space of images. Two simplifying assumptions are usually made to reduce model complexity. The
ﬁ rst is Markovianity: the density of a pixel conditioned on a small neighborhood, is assumed to be
independent from the rest of the image. The second assumption is homogeneity: the local density is
assumed to be independent of its absolute position within the image. The set of models satisfying
both of these assumptions constitute the class of homogeneous Markov random ﬁ elds (hMRFs).

Over the past two decades, studies of photographic images represented with multi-scale multi-
orientation image decompositions (loosely referred to as “wavelets ”) have revealed striking non-
Gaussian regularities and inter and intra-subband dependencies. For instance, wavelet coeﬃcients
generally have highly kurtotic marginal distributions [1, 2], and their amplitudes exhibit strong cor-
relations with the amplitudes of nearby coeﬃcients [3, 4]. One model that can capture the non-
Gaussian marginal behaviors is a product of non-Gaussian scalar variables [5]. A number of authors
have developed non-Gaussian MRF models based on this sort of local description [6, 7, 8], among
which the recently developed ﬁ elds of experts model [7] has demonstrated impressive performance
in denoising (albeit at an extremely high computational cost in learning model parameters).

An alternative model that can capture non-Gaussian local structure is a scale mixture model [9, 10,
11]. An important special case is Gaussian scale mixtures (GSM), which consists of a Gaussian ran-
dom vector whose amplitude is modulated by a hidden scaling variable. The GSM model provides
a particularly good description of local image statistics, and the Gaussian substructure of the model
leads to eﬃcient algorithms for parameter estimation and inference. Local GSM-based methods
represent the current state-of-the-art in image denoising [12]. The power of GSM models should be
substantially improved when extended to describe more than a small neighborhood of wavelet co-
eﬃcients. To this end, several authors have embedded local Gaussian mixtures into tree-structured

MRF models [e.g., 13, 14]. In order to maintain tractability, these models are arranged such that
coeﬃcients are grouped in non-overlapping clusters, allowing a graphical probability model with no
loops. Despite their global consistency, the artiﬁ cially imposed cluster boundaries lead to substantial
artifacts in applications such as denoising.

In this paper, we use a local GSM as a basis for a globally consistent and spatially homogeneous ﬁ eld
of Gaussian scale mixtures (FoGSM). Speciﬁ cally, the FoGSM is formulated as the product of two
mutually independent MRFs: a positive multiplier ﬁ eld obtained by exponentiating a homogeneous
Gaussian MRF (hGMRF), and a second hGMRF. We develop a parameter estimation procedure,
and show that the model is able to capture important statistical regularities in the marginal and joint
wavelet statistics of a photographic image. We apply the FoGSM to image denoising, demonstrating
substantial improvement over the previous state-of-the-art results obtained with a local GSM model.

1 Gaussian scale mixtures

√
A GSM random vector x is formed as the product of a zero-mean Gaussian random vector u and an
independent random variable z, as x d=
zu, where d= denotes equality in distribution. The density of
x is determined by the covariance of the Gaussian vector, Σ, and the density of the multiplier, p z (z),
(cid:2)
(cid:3)
(cid:1)
(cid:1)
through the integral

1√
z|Σ| exp
z
z
A key property of GSMs is that when z determines the scale of the conditional variance of x given z,
√
which is a Gaussian variable with zero mean and covariance zΣ. In addition, the normalized variable
x
z is a zero mean Gaussian with covariance matrix Σ.

Nx (0, zΣ) pz (z)dz ∝

− xT Σ−1 x
2z

p(x) =

pz (z)dz.

(1)

The GSM model has been used to describe the marginal and joint densities of local clusters of
wavelet coeﬃcients, both within and across subbands [9], where the embedded Gaussian structure
aﬀords simple and eﬃcient computation. This local GSM model has been be used for denoising, by
independently estimating each coeﬃcient conditioned on its surrounding cluster [12]. This method
achieves state-of-the-art performances, despite the fact that treating overlapping clusters as indepen-
dent does not give rise to a globally consistent statistical model that satisﬁ es all the local constraints.

2 Fields of Gaussian scale mixtures

In this section, we develop ﬁ elds of Gaussian scale mixtures (FoGSM) as a framework for mod-
eling wavelet coeﬃcients of photographic images. Analogous to the local GSM model, we use a
latent multiplier ﬁ eld to modulate a homogeneous Gaussian MRF (hGMRF). Formally, we deﬁ ne a
FoGSM x as the product of two mutually independent MRFs,
x d= u ⊗ √
z,
(2)
where u is a zero-mean hGMRF, and z is a ﬁ eld of positive multipliers that control the local coeﬃ-
cient variances. The operator ⊗ denotes element-wise multiplication, and the square root operation
is applied to each component. Note that x has a one-dimensional GSM marginal distributions, while
its components have dependencies captured by the MRF structures of u and z.
(cid:4)
(cid:4)
(cid:3)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:3)
(cid:8)−1
(cid:8)−1
(cid:7) √
(cid:6)
(cid:7) √
(cid:9)
Analogous to the local GSM, when conditioned on z, x is an inhomogeneous GMRF
|Qu |(cid:5)
|Qu |(cid:5)
(x (cid:4) √
z)T Qu (x (cid:4) √
p(x|z) ∝
− 1
− 1
Qu D
xT
z
z
z)
x
exp
exp
2
2
i zi
i zi
(3)
where Qu is the inverse covariance matrix of u (also known as the precision matrix), and D(·)
wise division of the two ﬁ elds, x (cid:4) √
denotes the operator that form a diagonal matrix from an input vector. Note also that the element-
z, yields a hGMRF with precision matrix Q u .
To complete the FoGSM model, we need to specify the structure of the multiplier ﬁ eld z. For
tractability, we use another hGMRF as a substrate, and map it into positive values by exponentiation,

D

=

,

log z
u
x
u (middle)
Fig. 1. Decomposition of a subband from image “boat” (left) into the normalized subband
and the multiplier ﬁ eld z (right, in the logarithm domain). Each image is rescaled individually to ﬁ
ll
the full range of grayscale intensities.
as was done in [10]. To be more speciﬁ c, we model log(z) as a hGMRF with mean µ and precision
(cid:10)|Qz |(cid:5)
(cid:2)
(cid:3)
matrix Qz , where the log operator is applied element-wise, from which the density of z follows as:
(log z − µ)T Qz (log z − µ)
− 1
pz (z) ∝
2
i zi
This is a natural extension of the univariate lognormal prior used previously for the scalar multiplier
in the local GSM model [12].

exp

.

(4)

The restriction to hGMRFs greatly simpliﬁ es computation with FoGSM. Particularly, we take ad-
vantage of the fact that a 2D hGMRF with circular boundary handling has a sparse block-circulant
precision matrix with a generating kernel θ specifying its nonzero elements. A block-circulant ma-
trix is diagonalized by the Fourier transform, and its multiplication with a vector corresponds to
convolution with the kernel θ. The diagonalizability with a ﬁ xed and eﬃciently computed transform
makes the parameter estimation, sampling, and inference with a hGMRF substantially more tractable
than with a general MRF. Readers are referred to [15] for a detailed description of hGMRFs.
Parameter estimation: The estimation of the latent multiplier ﬁ eld z and the model parameters
(µ, Qz , Qu ) may be achieved by maximizing log p(x, z; Q u, Qz , µ) with an iterative coordinate-ascent
method, which is guaranteed to converge. Speciﬁ cally, based on the statistical dependency structures
in the FoGSM model, the following three steps are repeated until convergence:
z(t+1) = argmaxz log p(x|z; Q (t)
z , µ(t) )
u ) + log p(z; Q (t)
(i)
= argmaxQu log p(x|z (t+1); Qu )
(ii)
Q(t+1)
u
, µ(t+1) ) = argmaxQz ,µ log p(z (t+1) ; Qz , µ)
(iii)
(Q(t+1)
(cid:6)
(cid:9)
(cid:12)
(cid:11)
z
x (cid:4) √
According to the FoGSM model structure, steps (ii) and (iii) correspond to maximum likelihood
z(t+1)
log z(t+1)
, respectively. Because of this,
estimates of the parameters of hGMRFs,
and
both steps may be eﬃciently implemented by exploiting the diagonalization of the precision matrices
with 2D Fourier transforms [15].
Step (i) in (5) may be implemented with conjugate gradient ascent [16]. To simplify description and
s = 1 (cid:4) √
(cid:2)
(cid:3)
(cid:2)
(cid:3)
computation, we introduce a new variable for the element-wise inverse square root of the multiplier:
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
z. The likelihood in (3) is then changed to:
(x ⊗ s)T Qu (x ⊗ s)
− 1
p(x|s) ∝
sT D(x)Qu D(x)s
2
i
i
(cid:2)
(cid:3)
The joint density of s is obtained from (4), using the relations between densities of transformed
p(s) ∝ 1(cid:5)
variables, as
− 1
2
i si

− 1
2

si exp

si exp

exp

=

(6)

(5)

.

(cid:14)
Combining . (6) and (7), step (i) in (5) is equivalent to computing ˆs
log p(s; Qz , µ), which is further simpliﬁ ed into:
sT D (x) Qu D (x) s +
1
2

argmin
s

1
2

.

(2 log s + µ)T Qz (2 log s + µ)
(7)
(cid:5)
= argmaxs log p(x|s; Qu ) +
(cid:15)

(2 log s + µ)T Qz (2 log s + µ)

.

(8)

Barbara

boat

house

peppers

)
x
(
p

g
o
l

x
x
x
x
Fig. 2. Empirical marginal log distributions of coeﬃcients from a multi-scale decomposition of photo-
graphic images (blue dot-dashed line), synthesized FoGSM samples from the same subband (red solid
line), and a Gaussian with the same standard deviation (red dashed line).
and the optimal ˆz is then recovered as ˆz = 1 (cid:4) ( ˆs ⊗ ˆs). We the optimize (8) with conjugate gradient
ascent [16]. Speciﬁ cally, the negative gradient of the objective function in (8) with respect to s is
− ∂ log p(x|s) p(s)
= D (x) Qu D (x) s + 2 D(s)−1 Qz (2 log s + µ)
∂s
= x ⊗ (θu (cid:3) (x ⊗ s)) + 2(θz (cid:3) (2 log s + µ)) (cid:4) s,
(cid:17) ⊗ h (cid:4) (s ⊗ s).
(cid:16)
and the multiplication of any vector h with the Hessian matrix can be computed as:
∂2 log p(x|s) p(s)
h = x ⊗ (θu (cid:3) (x ⊗ h)) + 4 (θz (cid:3) (h (cid:4) s)) (cid:4) s − 2
θz (cid:3) (log s + µ)
∂s2
Both operations can be expressed entirely in terms of element-wise operations ((cid:4) and ⊗) and 2D
convolutions ((cid:3)) with the generating kernels of the two precision matrices θ u and θz , which allows
for eﬃcient implementation.

3 Modeling photographic images

We have applied the FoGSM model to subbands of a multi-scale image representation known as
a steerable pyramid [17]. This decomposition is a tight frame, constructed from oriented multi-
scale derivative operators, and is overcomplete by a factor of 4K/3, where K is the number of
orientation bands. Note that the marginal and joint statistics we describe are not speciﬁ c to this
decomposition, and are similar for other multi-scale oriented representations. We ﬁ
t a FoGSM
model to each subband of a decomposed photographic image, using the algorithms described in the
previous section. For precision matrices Q u and Qz , we assumed a 5 × 5 Markov neighborhood
(corresponding to a 5 × 5 convolution kernel), which was loosely chosen to optimize the tradeoﬀ
between accuracy and overﬁ
tting.

Figure 1 shows the result of ﬁ
tting a FoGSM model to an example subband from the “boat ” image
(left panel). The subband is decomposed into the product of the u ﬁ eld (middle panel) and the
z ﬁ eld (right panel, in the logarithm domain), along with model parameters Q u , µ and Qz (not
shown). Visually, the changing spatial variances are represented in the estimated log z ﬁ eld, and the
estimated u is much more homogeneous than the original subband and has a marginal distribution
close to Gaussian.1 However, the log z ﬁ eld still has a non-Gaussian marginal distribution and
is spatially inhomogeneous, suggesting limitations of FoGSM for modeling photographic image
wavelet coeﬃcients (see Discussion).

The statistical dependencies captured by the FoGSM model can be further revealed by examining
√
marginal and joint statistics of samples synthesized with the estimated model parameters. A sample
from FoGSM can be formed by multiplying samples of u and
z. The former is obtained by
sampling from hGMRF u, and the latter is obtained from the element-wise exponentiation followed
by a element-wise square root operation of a sample of hGMRF log z. This procedure is again
eﬃcient for FoGSM due to the use of hGMRFs as building blocks [15].
Marginal distributions: We start by comparing the marginal distributions of the samples and the
original subband. Figure 2 shows empirical histograms in the log domain of a particular subband

1This ”Gaussianizing” behavior was
ﬁ rst noted in photographic images by Ruderman [18], who observed
that image derivative measurements that were normalized by a local estimate of their standard deviation had
approximately Gaussian marginal distributions.

close ∆ = 1

near ∆ = 4

far ∆ = 32

orientation

scale

real

sim

real

sim

Fig. 3. Examples of empirically observed distributions of wavelet coeﬃcient pairs, compared with
distributions from synthesized samples with the FoGSM model. See text for details.

from four diﬀerent photographic images (blue dot-dashed line), and those of the synthesized samples
of FoGSM models learned from each corresponding subband (red solid line). For comparison, a
Gaussian with the same standard deviation as the image subband is also displayed (red dashed line).
Note that the synthesized samples have conspicuous non-Gaussian characteristics similar to the real
subbands, exempliﬁ ed by the high peak and heavy tails in the marginal distributions. On the other
hand, they are typically less kurtotic than the real subbands. We believe this arises from the imprecise
Gaussian approximation of log z (see Discussion).
Joint distributions: In addition to one-dimensional marginal statistics, the FoGSM model is capa-
ble of capturing the joint behavior of wavelet coeﬃcients. As described in [4, 9], wavelet coeﬃcients
of photographic images present non-Gaussian dependencies. Shown in the ﬁ rst and the third rows
in Fig. 3 are empirical joint and conditional histograms for one subband of the “boat” image, for
ﬁ ve pairs of coeﬃcients, corresponding to basis functions with spatial separations of ∆ = {1, 4, 32}
samples, two orthogonal orientations and two adjacent scales. Contour lines in the joint histogram
are drawn at equal intervals of log probability. Intensities in the conditional histograms correspond
to probability, except that each column is independently rescaled to ﬁ
ll the full range of intensity.
For a pair of adjacent coeﬃcients, we observe an elliptical joint distribution and a “bow-tie” shaped
conditional distribution. The latter is indicative of strong non-Gaussian dependencies. For coeﬃ-
cients that are distant, the dependency becomes weaker and the corresponding joint and conditional
histograms become more separable, as would be expected for two independent random variables.

Random samples drawn from a FoGSM model, with parameters ﬁ
tted to the corresponding subband,
have statistical characteristics consistent with the general description of wavelet coeﬃcients of pho-
tographic images. Shown in the second and the fourth rows of Fig. 3 are the joint and conditional
histograms of synthesized samples from the FoGSM model estimated from the same subband as
in the ﬁ rst and the third rows. Note that the joint and conditional histograms of the synthesized
samples have similar transition of spatial dependencies as the separation increases (column 1,2 and
3), suggesting that the FoGSM accounts well for pairwise joint dependencies of coeﬃcients over a
full range of spatial separations. On the other hand, the dependencies between subbands of diﬀerent
orientations and scales are not properly modeled by FoGSM (column 4 and 5). This is especially
true for subbands at diﬀerent scales, which exhibit strong dependencies. The current FoGSM model

original image

noisy image (σ = 50)
GSM-BLS
FoGSM
(PSNR = 14.15dB)
(PSNR = 26.34dB)
(PSNR = 27.01dB)
Fig. 4. Denoising results using local GSM [12] and FoGSM. Performances are evaluated in peak-
signal-to-noise-ratio (PSNR), 20 log10 (255/σe ), where σe is the standard deviation of the error.
does not exhibit those dependencies as only spatial neighbors are used to make use the 2D hGMRFs
(see Discussion).

4 Application to image denoising

(9)

( ˆx, ˆz,

Let y = x + w be a wavelet subband of an image that has been corrupted with white Gaussian noise of
known variance. In an overcomplete wavelet domain such as steerable pyramid, the white Gaussian
noise is transformed into correlated Gaussian noise w ∼ N w (0, Σw ), whose covariance Σw can be
derived from the basis functions of the pyramid transform. With FoGSM as prior over x, commonly
used denoising methods involve expensive high-dimensional integration: for instance, maximum
a posterior estimate, ˆxMAP = argmaxx log p(x|y), requires a high-dimensional integral over z, and
the Bayesian least square estimation, ˆxBLS = E (x|y) requires a double high-dimensional integral
over x and z. Although it is possible to optimize with these criteria using Monte-Carlo Markov
sampling or other approximations, we instead develop a more eﬃcient deterministic algorithm that
takes advantage of the hGMRF structure in the FoGSM model. Speciﬁ cally, we compute
ˆQz , ˆµ) = argmaxx,z,Qu ,Qz ,µ log p(x, z|y; Qu, Qz , µ)
ˆQu ,
and take ˆx as the optimal denoised subband. Note that the model parameters are learned within the
inference process rather than in a separate parameter learning step. This strategy, known as partial
optimal solution [19], greatly reduces the computational complexity.
We optimize (9) with coordinate ascent, iterating between maximizing each of (x, z, Q u , Qz , µ) while
(cid:18)
(cid:19)
ﬁ xing the others. With ﬁ xed estimates of (z, Q u , Qz , µ), the optimization of x is
log p(x|z, y; Qu, Qz , µ) + log p(z|y; Qu, Qz , µ)
argmaxx log p(x, z|y; Qu, Qz , µ) = argmaxx
,
which reduces to argmax x log p(x|z, y; Qu), with the second term independent of x and can be
dropped from optimization. Given the Gaussian structure of x given z, this step is then equivalent to
(cid:19)
(cid:18)
lter (linear in y). Fixing (x, Q u , Qz , µ), the optimization of z is
a Wiener ﬁ
argmaxz log p(x, z|y; Qu, Qz , µ)= argmaxz
log p(y|x, z; Qu)+log p(x, z; Qu, Qz , µ)−log p(y; Qu , Qz , µ)
which is further reduced to argmax z log p(x, z; Qu , Qz , µ). Here, the ﬁ rst term was dropped since y is
independent of z when conditioned on x. The last term was also dropped since it is also independent
(cid:6)
(cid:9)
(cid:11)
(cid:12)
of z. Therefore, optimizing z given (x, Q u , Qz , µ) is equivalent to the ﬁ rst step of the algorithm in sec-
x (cid:4) √
tion 2, which can be implemented with eﬃcient gradient descent. Finally, given (x, z), the FoGSM
model parameters (Q u , Qz , µ) are estimated from hGMRFs
z(t+1)
log z(t+1)
and
, similar to the
second and third step in the algorithm of section 2. However, to reduce the overall computation
time, instead of a complete maximum likelihood estimation, these parameters are estimated with a
maximum pseudo-likelihood procedure [20], which ﬁ nds the parameters maximizing the product of
all conditional distributions (which are 1D Gaussians in the GMRF case), followed by a projection
to the subspace of FoGSM parameters that results in positive deﬁ nite precision matrices.

,

We tested this denoising method on a standard set of test images [12]. The noise corrupted images
were ﬁ rst decomposed these into a steerable pyramid with multiple levels (5 levels for a 512 × 512
image and 4 levels for a 256 × 256 image ) and 8 orientations. We assumed a FoGSM model for
each subband, with a 5 × 5 neighborhood for ﬁ eld u and a 1 × 1 neighborhood for ﬁ eld log z. These
sizes were chosen to provide a reasonable combination of performance and computational eﬃciency.
We then estimate the optimal x with the algorithm described previously, with the initial values of
x and z computed from subband denoised with the local GSM model [12]. Shown in Fig. 4 is an
example of denoising the “boat” image corrupted with simulated additive white Gaussian noise of
strength σ = 50, corresponding to a peak-signal-to-noise-ratio (PSNR), of 14.15 dB. We compare
this with the local GSM method in [12], which, assuming a local GSM model for the neighborhood
consisting of 3 × 3 spatial neighbors plus parent in the next coarsest scale, computes a Bayes least
squares estimate of each coeﬃcient conditioned on its surrounding neighborhood. The FoGSM
denoising achieves substantial improvement (+0.68 in PSNR) and is seen to exhibit better contrast
and continuation of oriented features (see Fig. 4). On the other hand, FoGSM introduces some
noticeable artifacts in low contrast areas, which is caused by numerical instability at locations with
small z. We ﬁ nd that the improvement in terms of PSNR is consistent across photographic images
and noise levels, as reported in Table 1. But even with a restricted neighborhood for the multiplier
ﬁ eld, this PSNR improvement does come at a substantial computational cost. As a rough indication,
running on a PowerPC G5 workstation with 2.3 Ghz processor and 16 Gb RAM memory, using
unoptimized MATLAB (version R14) code, denoising a 512 × 512 image takes on average 4.5 hours
(results averaging over 5 images), and denoising a 256× 256 image takes on average 2.4 hours (result
averaging over 2 images), to a convergence precision producing the reported results. Our preliminary
investigation indicates that the slow running time is mainly due to the nature of coordinate ascent
and the landscape of (9), which requires many iterations to converge.

5 Discussion

We have introduced ﬁ elds of Gaussian scale mixtures as a ﬂ exible and eﬃcient tool for modeling the
statistics of wavelet coeﬃcients of photographic images. We developed a feasible (although admit-
tedly computationally costly) parameter estimation method, and showed that samples synthesized
from the ﬁ
tted FoGSM model are able to capture structures in the marginal and joint wavelet statis-
tics of photographic images. Preliminary results of applying FoGSM to image denoising indicate
substantial improvements over the state-of-the-art methods based on the local GSM model.

[9, 10], there
Although FoGSM has a structure that is similar to the local scale mixture model
is a fundamental diﬀerence between them. In FoGSM, hGMRF structures are enforced in u and
log z, while the local scale mixture models impose minimal statistical structure on these variables.
Because of this, our model easily extends to images of arbitrary size, while the local scale mixture
models are essentially conﬁ ned to describing small image patches (the curse of dimensionality, and
the increase in computational cost prevent one from scaling the patch size up). On the other hand,
the close relation to Gaussian MRF makes the analysis and computation of FoGSM signiﬁ cantly
easier than other non-Gaussian MRF based image models [6, 7, 5].

We envision, and are currently working on, a number of model improvements. First, the model
should beneﬁ
t from the introduction of more general Markov neighborhoods, including wavelet
coeﬃcients from subbands at other scales and orientations [4, 12], since the current model is clearly
not accounting for these dependencies (see Fig. 3). Secondly, the log transformation used to derive
the multiplier ﬁ eld from a hGMRF is somewhat ad hoc, and we believe that substitution of another
nonlinear transformation (e.g., a power law [14]) might lead to a more accurate description of the
image statistics. Thirdly, the current denoising method estimates model parameter during the process
of denoising, which produces image adaptive model parameters. We are exploring the possibility of
using a set of generic model parameter learned a priori on a large set of photographic images, so that
a generic statistical model for all photographic images based on FoGSM can be built. Finally, there
exist residual inhomogeneous structures in the log z ﬁ eld (see Fig. 1) that can likely be captured by
explicitly incorporating local orientation [21] or phase into the model. Finding tractable models and
algorithms for handling such circular variables is challenging, but we believe their inclusion will
result in substantial improvements in modeling and in denoising performance.

σ/PSNR
ﬁ ngerprint
boat
barco
Barbara
10/28.13
33.28 (32.45)
34.12 (33.58)
35.05 (34.42)
35.01 (34.01)
25/20.17
28.45 (27.44)
30.03 (29.34)
30.44 (29.73)
30.10 (29.07)
50/14.15
25.11 (24.13)
27.01 (26.35)
27.36 (26.63)
26.40 (25.45)
100/8.13
21.78 (21.21)
24.20 (23.79)
24.44 (23.84)
23.01 (22.61)
σ/PSNR
peppers
Lena
house
Flintstones
10/28.13
34.38 (33.73)
35.94 (35.60)
35.63 (35.27)
32.47 (31.78)
25/20.17
29.78 (29.18)
32.11 (31.70)
31.64 (31.32)
28.29 (27.48)
50/14.15
26.43 (25.93)
29.12 (28.62)
28.51 (28.23)
24.82 (24.02)
100/8.13
23.17 (22.80)
26.12 (25.77)
25.33 (25.31)
21.24 (20.49)
Table 1. Denoising results with FoGSM on diﬀerent images and diﬀerent noise levels. Shown in the
table are PSNRs (20 log10 (255/σe ), where σe is the standard deviation of the error) of the denoised im-
ages, and in the parenthesis are the PSNRs of the same images denoised with a local GSM model [12].
References

[1] P. J. Burt. Fast ﬁ
lter transforms for image processing. Comp. Graph. Image Proc., 16:20–51, 1981.
[2] D. J. Field. Relations between the statistics of natural images and the response properties of cortical cells.
J. Opt. Soc. Am., 4(12):2379–2394, 1987.
[3] B. Wegmann and C. Zetzsche. Statistical dependencies between orientation ﬁ
lter outputs used in human
vision based image code. In Proc. Visual Comm. and Image Proc., volume 1360, pages 909–922, 1990.
[4] R. W. Buccigrossi and E. P. Simoncelli. Image compression via joint statistical characterization in the
wavelet domain. IEEE Trans. on Image Proc., 8(12):1688–1701, 1999.
[5] Y. W. Teh, M. Welling, S. Osindero, and G. E. Hinton. Energy-based models for sparse overcomplete
representations. J. of Machine Learning Res., 4:1235–1260, 2003.
[6] S. C. Zhu, Y. Wu, and D. Mumford. Filters, random ﬁ elds and maximum entropy (FRAME): Towards a
uniﬁ ed theory for texture modeling. Int’l. J. Comp. Vis. , 27(2):107–126, 1998.
[7] S. Roth and M. J. Black. Fields of experts: a framework for learning image priors. In IEEE Conf. on
Comp. Vis. and Pat. Rec., volume 2, pages 860–867, 2005.
[8] P. Gehler and M. Welling. Products of ”edge-perts ”. In Adv. in Neural Info. Proc. Systems (NIPS*05).
MIT Press, 2006.
[9] M. J. Wainwright and E. P. Simoncelli. Scale mixtures of Gaussians and the statistics of natural images.
In Adv. Neural Info. Proc. Sys. (NIPS*99), volume 12, pages 855–861, May 2000.
[10] Y. Karklin and M. S. Lewicki. A hierarchical Bayesian model for learning non-linear statistical regularities
in non-stationary natural signals. Neural Computation, 17(2):397–423, 2005.
[11] A. Hyv ¨arinen, P. O. Hoyer, and M. Inki. Topographic ICA as a model of natural image statistics. In the
First IEEE Int ’l. Workshop on Bio. Motivated Comp. Vis. , London, UK, 2000.
[12] J. Portilla, V. Strela, M. J. Wainwright, and E. P. Simoncelli. Image denoising using scale mixtures of
Gaussians in the wavelet domain. IEEE Trans. on Image Proc., 12(11):1338–1351, 2003.
[13] J. Romberg, H. Choi, and R. G. Baraniuk. Bayesian tree-structured image modeling using wavelet domain
hidden Markov models. IEEE Trans. on Image Proc., 10(7):303–347, 2001.
[14] M. J. Wainwright, E. P. Simoncelli, and A. S. Willsky. Random cascades on wavelet trees and their use in
modeling and analyzing natural imagery. Appl. and Comp. Harm. Ana., 11(1):89–123, 2001.
[15] H. Rue and L. Held. Gaussian Markov Random Fields: Theory And Applications. Monographs on
Statistics and Applied Probability. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2005.
[16] W. H. Press, S. A. Teukolsky, W. T. Vetterling, and B. P. Flannery. Numerical Recipes. Cambridge, 2nd
edition, 2002.
[17] E. P. Simoncelli and W. T. Freeman. The steerable pyramid: A ﬂ exible architecture for multi-scale
derivative computation. In IEEE Int’l. Conf. on Image Proc. , volume 3, pages 444–447, 1995.
[18] D. Ruderman. The statistics of natural images. Network : Comp. in Neural Sys., 5:598–605, 1994.
[19] M. Figueiredo and J. Leit ¨ao. Unsupervised image restoration and edge location using compound Gauss-
Markov random ﬁ elds and MDL principle. IEEE Trans. on Image Proc., 6(8):1089–1122, 1997.
[20] J. Besag. On the statistical analysis of dirty pictures. J. of the Royal Stat. Soc., Series B, 48:259–302,
1986.
[21] D. K. Hammond and E. P. Simoncelli.
Image denoising with an orientation-adaptive Gaussian scale
mixture model. In Proc. 13th IEEE Int ’l. Conf. on Image Proc. , pages 1433–1436, October 2006.

