A  H um a n l i k e   P r e d i c t o r   o f   F a c i a l  
A t t r a c t i v e n e s s

Amit  Kag ian*1, Gideon Dror‡ 2,  Tomme r Leyvand *3,  Daniel Cohen-Or*4,  Ey tan Ruppin* 5
* Schoo l o f Compu ter  Scienc es,  Tel-Avi v Uni ve rsi ty,  Tel-Avi v,  69978 ,  Isr ael.  
‡ The  Academic  Co llege  o f Tel-Avi v-Ya ffo ,  Tel-Avi v,  64044 ,  Isr ael.
Ema il : {1kag ianam,  3 tommer ,  4dcor ,  5rupp in}@pos t.tau. ac.il,   2gideon@mta.ac.il

Abstra ct

Thi s  wo rk  presen ts  a   me thod   fo r   est ima t ing  huma n  facial  attrac tivene ss ,  
based   on  sup ervi sed   learni ng  techniques.   Nume rous   facial  featur es   tha t  
desc r ibe   facial  geome try,   co lor   and   textur e,   comb ine d   with  an  average  
human   attract ive ne ss   score  fo r   each  facia l  ima ge ,   are   used   to   train   va r ious  
pred ictors.   Facial  at tractive ne ss  ratings   produced   by  the  fi na l  pred ictor   are 
found   to   be  hi gh ly  correla ted   wi th  huma n  ratings ,   marked ly  imp rovi ng 
previous  machi ne  
learni ng  ach ievemen ts.   Simu la ted   psychophys ica l 
exp er imen ts  wi th  vi r tua lly  ma nipu lated   ima ge s  revea l  prefe rences  in  the  
machi ne 's   jud gmen ts  wh ich   are  remarkab ly  simi lar   to   tho se   of  humans.  
The se   exp er imen ts  shed   new 
facial  
theor ies  of 
ligh t  on  exi st ing  
attractive ne ss  suc h  as 
the  ave rage ne ss,   smoo thn ess  and   symme try 
hypo the se s.   I t  is  int r igu ing   to   find   tha t  a  machi ne   trained   exp l icitly  to  
cap tur e   an  operationa l  performance  cr iter ia  such  as  at tractivene ss   rating,  
imp lic itly  cap tur es  basic  human   psychophys ica l  b iase s  character izing  the  
percep tion of  facia l attractivene ss  in  gene ra l.

1

I n t r o d u c t i o n

Phi loso phe r s,  ar tist s  and   sc ient ist s  have  been  trying  to   cap tur e  the   na tur e o f  beaut y  s ince  the  
ear ly  days   of  phi loso phy.   Altho ugh  in  modern  days   a  common  layma n 's   no tion   is  tha t 
judgment s  of  beaut y  are  a   ma tter   of  sub jective   op inion ,   recent   fi nd ings   sugge st   tha t  peop le 
mi ght   sha re   a  common  tas te   fo r   facial  attract ivene ss   and   tha t  the ir   prefe rences  ma y  be  an 
inna te   par t  o f  the   pr imary  cons titut ion  of  our   na tur e.   Several  exp er ime nt s  ha ve   shown  tha t  2  
to   8   mont hs   o ld   infan ts  pre fe r   looki ng  at  faces  wh ich  adul ts  rate  as  being   mo re  at tractive 
[1] .   In  add ition,   attractive ne ss   ratings   show  very  hi gh   agr eemen t  between  group s  of  raters  
belong ing  to   the   same   cul ture   and   eve n  across  cul tur es   [2] .   Suc h  f ind ings   g ive   r ise  to   the  
que st   fo r   common  fac tors   wh ich  determine   huma n  facia l  attract ivene ss .   Accord ing ly,  
va r ious  hypo the se s,   from  cogn i tive ,   evo lu tiona l  and   social  persp ective s,   ha ve   been  pu t 
fo rwa rd  to  desc r ibe the  common pre fe rences  fo r  fac ial beaut y.  

Insp ired   by  Sir   Franc is  Galton’ s  pho togr aphic  me thod   of  composi ng  faces  [3] ,   Rubens tein,  
La nglo is   and   Ro ggman   crea ted   ave raged   faces  by  mo rphi ng   mu ltip le   ima ge s   toge ther   and  
proposed   tha t ave rage ne ss  is   the  answe r   fo r   facial  attract ive ne ss  [4 ,  5] .  Huma n  jud ge s  found  
the se   ave raged   faces   to   be   a ttractive   and   rated   them  wi th  a ttractive ne ss  rat ings  hi gher   tha n 
the   mean   rating   of   the   compone nt   fa ces   compos ing  them.   Gramme r   and   Tho rnh ill  ha ve  
inve s tiga ted   symme try  and   ave ragene ss   of   faces   and   conc lud ed   that  symme try  wa s  mo re 
impor tant   than  ave rage ne ss   in  facial  at tractive ne ss  [6] .   Li t tle  and   co lleague s  ha ve   agr eed  
tha t  ave rage   faces  are   attractive   bu t  claim  tha t  faces  wi th  cer tain  ext reme   fe atur es,   such  as  
ext reme   se xua lly  d imo rphic   traits,   ma y  be  mo re  at trac tive   tha n  average   faces  [7] .   Othe r  

rese arche r s  have  sugg ested   va r ious  cond itions   wh ich   may  cont r ibu te  to   facia l  attrac tive ne ss  
such  as  neona te   fea tur es,   p leasa nt   exp ressions   and   fami liar ity.   Cunni ngham  and   hi s  
associates   suggest   a  mu lt ip le   f itne ss  model  in  wh ich  the re  is   no   si ngle   const ruc ting  l ine   tha t 
determine s  at tractive ne ss.   Instead ,   d iffe rent   catego r ies  of  fea tur es  si gna l  d iffe rent   desi rab le  
qua lit ies  o f  the   perce ived   ta rge t  [8] .   Even   so ,   the   mu lt ip le  fi tne ss   model   agr ees  tha t  some  
facia l qua l ities  are uni ve rsa l ly phys ical ly a ttractive  to  peop le.

Apar t  from  el iciting  the   fa cial  cha racter ist ics  wh ich  accoun t  fo r   attract ive ne ss ,   modern  
rese arche r s  try  to   desc r ibe  und er lying  mecha ni sms   fo r   these   prefe rences.  Many  cont r ibutors 
refe r   to   the   evo lut iona ry  or igi ns   of   attrac tivene ss   prefe rences   [9]-[11] .   Accord ing  to   th is  
view,   facial  traits  si gna l  ma te   qua lity  and   imp ly  chances  fo r   reproduc tive   suc cess   and  
parasi te  resi stance.   Some   evo lu tionary  theor is ts  sugge s t  tha t  pre fe rred   featur es  mi ght   no t  
si gna l  ma te   qua l ity  but   that  the   “good   taste”  by  itself  is  an  evo lut iona ry  adap tation  
( ind ividua ls  wi th  a  prefe rence  fo r   attractive ne ss  wi ll  ha ve   attract ive   o ff sp r ing   tha t  wi ll  be 
fa vo red   as  ma tes)   [9] .   Ano the r   mechan ism  exp lains   a t tractivene ss '  pre fe rences  thr ough  a 
cogn itive   theory  -  a  pre fe rence   fo r   attractive   faces  mi ght   be  induced   as  a  by-produc t  of  
ge ne ral  percep tion  or   recogn ition  mechan isms   [5 ,   12] :  Attractive   faces  mi ght   be  p leasan t  to  
look  at   si nce   they  are  clo se r   to   the  cogni tive   represe ntat ion  of   the   face  catego ry  in  the mind .  
The se   cogni tive   represe nta t ions   are  desc r ibed   as  a  par t  of  a  cogni tive   mecha ni sm  tha t 
abst racts  pro to typ es  from  d ist inc t  c lasse s  o f  ob jects.   The se   pro to types  rela te  to   ave rage  
faces  when  cons ider ing  the   ave ragene ss   hypo the si s.   A  thi rd   vi ew  ha s  sugge st ed   tha t  facia l 
attractive ne ss  or igi na tes   in  a   so cial  mecha ni sm,  where  prefe rences  ma y  be  depend ent   on  the  
learni ng h istory of  the  ind ivi dua l and  eve n on  hi s  so cia l goals  [12] .  

Diffe rent   st ud ies  ha ve   tr ied   to   use   compu tationa l  methods  in   order   to   ana lyz e  fac ial  
attractive ne ss.  Ave ragi ng  fa ces  wi th  mo rph  too ls  was   done   in   se ve ral   case s  (e.g.   [5 ,   13]) . In 
[14] ,   lase r   sc ans  of  faces  were   put   into   comp lete  correspond enc e  wi th  the   ave rage   face  in  
order   to   examine   the   rela t ionship   between  facial  at tractive ne ss ,   age ,   and   ave rage ne ss.  
Ano the r   approach  was  used   in  [15] where  a  ge ne tic  algo r ithm,   gu ided   by  interact ive   use r  
se lections ,   wa s  progr ammed   to   evo lve   a  “mo s t  beaut ifu l”  fema le  face.   [16]   used   machi ne  
learni ng  me thods  to   invest iga te   whethe r   a  machi ne   can  pred ict  a ttractive ne ss   rat ings   by  
learni ng  a  mapp ing  from  fac ial  ima ge s  to  their attractiveness scores.  Their predictor achieved a  
significant  correlation of 0.6 with average  human  ratings, demonstrating  that  facial beauty  can be 
learned  by  a machine,  at  least  to  some degree.  Howeve r ,   as huma n  raters  st ill  do   si gni ficant ly  
outperfo rm  the   pred ictor   of  [16] ,   the   cha llenge   of  cons truc ting  a  facial  a ttract ive ne ss  
machi ne   wi th  huma n  leve l  eva lua tion  accur acy  ha s   rema ined   open.   A  pr ima ry  go al  of  th is 
st ud y  is  to   surpass   the se   resu lts  by  develop ing   a   ma chine  which  obta ins  human  level 
performance   in   predict ing   facia l  attract iveness . Hav ing  accomp lished   thi s,   our   se cond  
ma in  go a l  is  to   cond uc t  a  se r ies  o f  simu lated   psyc ho phys ical  exp er ime nt s  and   s tud y  the  
resemb lance   between  huma n  and   machi ne   judgme nt s.   Thi s  latter   task   carr ies  two   po tent ial  
rewards :  A.   To   determine   whe the r   the   machi ne   can  aid   in  unders tand ing  the   psyc ho phys ics 
of  human  facia l  attractive ne ss ,   cap ital izing   on  the   ready  access ib il ity  o f  the   ana lys is  of  its  
inne r   wo rki ng s,   and   B .   To   study   whether  learning   an  exp l icit   operat iona l  rat ings 
predict ion  task  a lso   enta ils  learning   imp licit   human l ike   b iase s ,   at  least   fo r   the   case   of  
facia l attractive ne ss .

2 T h e   f a c i a l   t r a i n i n g   d a t a b a s e :   A c q u i s i t i o n ,   p r e p r o c e s s i n g  
a n d   r e p r e s e n t a t i o n

2 . 1 R a t i n g   f a c i a l   a t t r a c t i v e n e s s

The   cho sen  database   wa s  composed   of  91   facial  ima ge s  of  Ame r ican  fema les,   take n  by  the  
Japane se  pho togr aphe r  Aki ra Gomi .  Al l 91  samp les we re frontal co lor  pho togr aphs  of  young 
Caucasian   fema les   wi th  a   neut ral   exp ress ion.   All  samp les  we re   of   simi lar   age ,   sk in  co lor  
and   ge nd er .   The   sub jects’  por traits  had   no   accessor ies   or   o the r   d ist racting   items   such  as 
jewelry.  Al l  91   facia l  ima ge s  in  the  datase t  we re  rated   for   attractive ne ss  by  28   human  raters 
(15  ma les,   13   fema les)   on  a   7-po int   Liker t  sc a le  (1   =   very  una ttractive ,   7   =   ve ry  attractive ) .  
Ra tings   we re  co llected   wi th   a   sp eci fi cally  desi gned   htm l  inter face.   Each  rater   wa s  asked   to  

view  the   ent ire   se t  befo re  rating  in  order   to   acqui re  a  no tion  o f  attract ive ne ss   sc ale.   The re 
wa s  no   time   limi t  fo r   judgi ng  the  a ttractive ne ss  o f  each   samp le and   raters  could   go  back  and  
ad jus t  the   ratings   o f  already  rated   samp les.   The   ima ge s  we re  prese nted   to   each  ra ter   in  a  
random  order   and   each  ima ge   wa s  prese nted   on  a  separate  page .   The   fi na l  attractive ne ss  
rating  o f  each   samp le   was   i ts  mean  rat ing   across   all   raters.   To   va lidate   tha t  the   numb er   o f 
ratings   co llected   adequa te ly  represented   the   ``co llec tive   attractivene ss   rat ing ' '  we   randomly  
d ivided   the   raters   into   two   d isj o int   group s  o f  equa l   size.   For   each   facial   ima ge ,   we  
calcul ated   the   mean  ra ting   on  each  group ,   and   calcula ted   the   Pearson  correlat ion  between  
the   mean  rat ings  of   the   two   group s.   Thi s  process  wa s  repeated   1 ,000   time s.   The  mean  
correlation  between  two   group s  wa s  0 .92   (  =   0 .01 ) .   Thi s  correspond s  we l l  to   the   known  
leve l  o f  cons istenc y  among  group s  o f  raters  repor ted   in  the   litera tur e  (e.g.   [2]) .   Hence,   the  
mean  ratings   co llected   are   stab le  ind icators  o f  at trac tive ne ss   tha t  can  be  us ed   fo r   the  
learni ng  task .   The   fac ial   se t  contained   faces   in   all  range s  of  attractive ne ss.   Fina l 
attractive ne ss  ratings  range   from 1 .42  to  5 .75  and  the  me an  rating was 3 .33  ( =  0 .94) .

2 . 2 D a t a   p r e p r o c e s s i n g   a n d   r e p r e s e n t a t i o n

P relimina ry  exp er ime ntat ion  wi th  va r ious   ways   o f  represent ing  a  facia l  ima ge  ha ve  
sys tema t ically  shown   tha t   featur es  based   on   measur ed   propor tions ,   d istances   and   angles  o f  
faces  are mo s t e ffective   in  cap tur ing  the  no tion of  facial attractive ne ss  (e.g.  [16]) .  To  ext rac t 
facia l  fea tur es  we   deve loped   an  au toma tic  eng ine   tha t  is  capab le  of  ident i fyi ng  eye s,   no se ,  
lips,   eyebrows ,   and   head   contour .   In  to ta l,   we   measured   84   coord ina tes  desc r ib ing  the  
locations  of  tho se   fac ial  fe atur es  (Figu re  1) .   Seve ral  regions   are  sugge s ted   fo r   ex tracting  
mean  ha ir   co lor ,   mean  ski n  co lor   and   sk in  text ur e.   The   featur e  ext ract ion  process   wa s  
basically  automa t ic  but   some   coord inates   needed   to   be  manua lly  ad jus ted   in   some  of  the  
image s.   The   fac ial  coord ina tes  are  used   to   crea te  a  d is tances- vector   of  all  3 ,486   d istances  
between  al l  pairs  of  coord inates  in  the  comp lete  gr aph  c reated   by  al l  coord ina tes.   For   each 
image ,   al l  d ist ances  are   no rma lized   by  face  lengt h.   In  a   simi lar   ma nne r ,   a  s lopes- vector   of 
all  the   3 ,486   slopes  of  the   line s  connecting  the  facial   coord ina tes  is  comput ed .   Cen tral 
fl uc tua ting  asymme try  (CFA) ,   wh ich  is  desc r ibed   in  [6] ,   is  calculated   from  the   coo rd ina tes  
as  we ll.   The   app lication  also   provides, fo r   each  fa ce,   Hue ,   Satur ation  and   Value   (HSV) 
va lue s o f  ha ir  co lor  and  ski n  co lor ,  and  a measur eme nt  o f  ski n  smoo thne ss.    

Figur e  1 :   Facia l  coord ina tes   wi th  ha ir   and   sk in   samp le  regions   as  represe nted   by  the   facial  
featur e  ext ractor .   Coord ina tes  are   used   fo r   calculat ing  geome tr ic  featur es   and   asymme try.  
Samp le   reg ions  are  us ed   fo r   calcu lating  co lor   va lue s  and   smoo thn ess.   The   samp le   image ,  
used   fo r  illus tration onl y,  is  of T .G.  and  is prese nted  wi th he r   ful l consent .

Comb ini ng  the  d istances-ve ctor  and  the   slopes-vector  yi elds  a vector  represe nta tion  of 6 ,972  
geometric  fea ture s   fo r   each  ima ge .   Since  st rong   correlations  are  exp ected   among   the  
featur es  in  su ch  represe nta t ion,   pr inc ipa l  componen t  ana lys is  (PCA)   wa s  app lied   to   the se 
geome tr ic  featur es,  produc ing  90  pr inc ipal componen ts wh ich  sp an  the   sub -space de fi ned  by 
the   91   image   vec tor   representat ions.   The   geome tr ic  featur es  are  pro jected   on  those   90 
pr inc ipal  compone nt s  and   supp ly  90   or thogo na l  eigen fea ture s  represe nt ing  the   ge ome tr ic  
featur es.   Eight   measu red   fe atur es  we re  no t  inc lud ed   in   the   PCA  ana lys is,   inc lud ing  CFA,  
smoo thne ss,   hair   co lor   coord ina tes  (HSV)   and   ski n  co lor   coord ina tes.   The se   features  are 

ass umed   to   be  d irec tly  conn ected   to   huma n  percep tion  o f  facia l  at tractive ne ss  and   are  he nce  
kep t  at   the ir   or igi na l   va lue s.  The se   8   featur es  we re   added   to   the  90   geome tr ic  eige nfeatur es,  
resu l ting   in  a  to tal of 98   image- fea ture s represe nt ing  each  facial ima ge  in  the  datase t.  

3 E x p e r i m e n t s   a n d   r e s u l t s

3 . 1 P r e d i c t o r   c o n s t r u c t i o n   a n d   v a l i d a t i o n

We   exp er ime nted   wi th   se veral  induc t ion  a lgo r ithms   inc lud ing   simp le   Linear   Re gr ession,  
Least   Squa res   Suppor t  Vector   Machi ne   (LS -SVM)   (bo th  linear   as  we ll  as  non-l ine ar)   and  
Gauss ian  P rocess es  (GP ) .   Howeve r ,   as  the   LS -SVM   and   GP   showed   no   sub stant ial  
advan tage ove r  Li near  Re gr ess ion,  the  latter  wa s  used  and  is presen ted  in  the   seque l.  

A  ke y  ingr ed ient   in  our  me thods  is  to   use   a  proper   image-featur es  se lection  st ra tegy.   To   thi s  
end   we   used   sub se t  featur e   se lect ion,   imp leme nted   by  rank ing  the   image -featur es  by  the ir  
Pearso n  correlation wi th  the   targe t.  Othe r   ranki ng  func t ions  produced  no   sub s tan tial  gain.  To 
measu re   the   perfo rma nce  o f  our   me thod   we   removed   one   samp le   from  the   who le   datase t.  
Thi s  samp le  se rved   as  a   test   se t.  We  found ,   fo r   each  le ft   out   samp le,   the   op tima l  numb er   of  
image -featur es   by  per fo rmi ng  leave -one -o ut -c ross -va l idation  (LOOCV )   on  the   rema ini ng 
samp les  and   se lecting  the   numb er   of  featur es  tha t mi nimi zes  the  abso lute  d iffe rence  between  
the   algo r ithm' s  output   and   the   targe ts  of  the   traini ng   se t .   In  o the r   words,   the   score  for   a  test  
examp le wa s  pred icted   us ing  a   si ngle model  based   on  the  traini ng  se t  onl y.  Thi s  process  wa s  
repeated  n=91   time s,  once   for  each  ima ge   samp le.  The   vector  of  attract ive ne ss  pred ictions  of 
all  ima ge s   is  the n  comp ared   wi th  the   true   targets.   The se   scores  are  fo und   to   be  in  a   h igh  
Pearso n  correlation  o f  0 .82   with  the   mean  ratings   o f  huma ns  (P-va lue  <   10 -23) ,   wh ich  
correspond s  to   a  no rma lized   Mean  Squa red   Error   of  0 .39 .  Thi s  accur acy  is  a   marked  
imp roveme nt   ove r   the   recen tly  pub lished   perfo rma nce  resu lts   of   a Pearso n  correlat ion  o f  0 .6  
on  a  s imi lar   datase t  [16] .   The   ave rage   correlation  of  an   ind ividua l  human  ra ter   to   the   mean  
correlations   o f  all  o ther   raters  in  our   datase t  is  0 .67   and   the   ave rage   correlation  between  the  
mean  ratings  o f group s of  ra ters  is 0 .92  (se ction 2 .1) .

I t  shou ld   be  no ted   tha t   we   tr ied   to   use   thi s  featur e  se lec t ion  and   tra in ing   procedur e  wi th   the  
or igi na l  geome tr ic   featur es   ins tead   of   the   eigenfea tur es,   rank ing   them  by  the ir   correlation   to  
the   targe ts  and   se lec ting   up   to  300  best   ranked   fea tur es.  Thi s,   howeve r ,  ha s  fa i led   to   produce 
good   pred ictors  due   to   st rong   correlations  between  the   or igi na l  geome tr ic  featur es  (ma xima l  
Pearso n  correlation ob tained  was 0 .26) .

3 . 2

S i m i l a r i t y   o f   m a c h i n e   a n d   h u m a n   j u d g m e n t s

Each     rater    (huma n   and    machi ne )      ha s   a   91    d imens iona l  ra ting  vector     descr ib ing     its 

Figur e  2 :   Dist r ibu tion   of   me an  Euc lidean  d istance  from  each  huma n  rater   to   a ll  o the r   raters
in  the   ra t ings  sp ace .   The   machi ne ’s   ave rage   d is tanc e   fo rm  a ll  o the r   ra ters  ( lef t   bar)   is 
sma ller  tha n  the  ave rage  d ist ance  of each o f  the  huma n  ra ters  to  all o the rs.  

attractive ne ss  ratings   of  all  91   image s.   The se   vectors   can  be  emb edded   in  a  91   d ime ns iona l  
ra tings  sp ace .   The   Euc lid ian  d is tanc e  between  all   raters   (huma n  and   machi ne )   in  thi s  sp ace  
wa s  comp uted .  Compared  with  each o f  the  huma n  rater s,  the  ratings  of  the  machi ne  we re  the  
close st ,   on  ave rage ,   to   the   ratings  of  a ll  o the r   huma n  raters  (Figur e  2) .   To   ve r ify  tha t  the  
machi ne   ratings   are   no t  out l iers  tha t  fa ll  out   o f  clus ters  of  huma n  raters  (eve n  though  the ir  
mean  d is tance  from  the   o ther   ratings   is  sma ll)   we   sur rounded   each  o f  the   rating  vectors  in  
the   ratings   sp ace  wi th  mu l tid imens iona l  sphe res  of  se veral  rad ius   s izes.   The   mach ine   had  
mo re human  ne ighbors  tha n  the  mean  number  of  ne ighbors  of  human  rater s,   test i fyi ng  tha t  it 
does  no t  fa ll  between  clus ters.   Fina lly,   fo r   a  gr aphic  d isp lay  o f  mach ine   rat ings   among 
human  ratings   we   app lied   PCA   to   mach ine  and   human  rating s  in  the   rating  sp ace and  
pro jected   all  ratings  onto   the   resul t ing  fi rs t  2   and   3   pr inc ipal  compone nt s.   Ind eed ,   the  
machi ne  is we ll p laced  in  a mid -zone  o f  huma n  rater s  (F igur e 3) .  

5

0

-5

-10

Machine

0

-4

-8

7

-10

-5

0

5

10

Mach ine

0

-7

0

-5

5

                                                                             (a)                                                                                                              (b)

Figur e  3 :  Lo ca tion   of  machi ne   ratings   among  the   28   huma n  ratings :  Rating s  we re   pro jected 
into   2   d imensions  (a)   and   3   d imens ions  (b)   by  perfo rmi ng  PCA  on  al l  ratings  and   pro jecting  
them  on  the   f irst   pr inc ipal  compone nt s.   The   proj ected   da ta  exp lain  29 .8%  of  the   va r iance  in  
(a)  and  36 .6% in  (b) .

3 . 3   P s y c h o p h y s i c a l   e x p e r i m e n t s   i n   s i l i c o

A  number   o f  simu la ted   psychophys ical  exp er ime nt s   reveal  huma nl ike   b iase s   of  the  
machi ne 's   perfo rmance.   Rub enstein  e t  al.   d iscuss   a  mo rphi ng 
technique   to   create 
ma thema t ically  ave raged   fa ces  from  mu ltip le  face  ima ges  [5] .   They  repor ted   tha t  ave raged  
faces  made   o f  16   and   32   or ig ina l  compone nt   ima ge s  we re  rated   highe r   in  attract ive ne ss   tha n  
the   me an   attract ivene ss   ra tings   of   the ir   compone nt   faces  and   hi gh er   tha n  composi tes 
cons ist ing  of   fewe r   faces.   In  the ir   exp er imen t,   32-component   composi tes  we re  fo und   to   be 
the   mo st   attrac tive .  We   used   a   simi lar   technique   to   create  ave raged   vi r tua lly-mo rphe d   faces 
wi th  va r ious   numb ers  o f   compone nt s,   nc,   and   have   let  the   machi ne   pred ict  the ir 
attractive ne ss.  To   thi s  end ,  coord ina te va lue s  of  the or igi na l compone nt   faces we re ave raged  
to   create  a   new  se t  of  coord ina tes  fo r   the   compo si te.   The se   coord ina tes  we re   used   to  
calcul ate  the  geome tr ical  featur es  and   CFA  of  the   averaged   face.   Smoo thness   and   HSV  
va lue s  fo r   the   compos ite   faces  we re  calcu lated   by  ave rag ing  the   correspond ing  va lue s  of  the  
compone nt   faces 1.   To  stud y  the   e ffect  of nc  on  the   attractive ne ss   score  we   produced   1 ,000  
vi r tua l  mo rph   ima ge s   fo r   each  va lue   o f  n c  between  2   and   50 ,   and   used   our   a ttrac tive ne ss  
pred ictor  (se ction 3 .1)  to  compu te  the  attract ive ne ss   sco res of  the  resul t ing  composi tes.  

In  accordance  wi th  the   exp er imental  resu lts  o f  [5] ,   the   machi ne   man ifest s  a  huma nl ike   b ias  
fo r   hi ghe r   scores  of  ave raged   composi tes  ove r   the ir   compone nt s’   mean  score.   Figur e  4a, 
present ing  the se   resul ts,   shows   the   percent   of  component s  wh ich  we re   rated   as  less  
attractive   tha n  the ir   correspond ing  compo si te,   fo r   each  number   o f  compone nt s   n c.   As  
evident ,   the   attract ive ne ss   rating  of  a  compo si te  surpass es  a  large r   percent   of  its  
compone nt s’   rat ings  as  nc   inc rease s.   Figur e  4a  also   shows   the mean  scores  of  1 ,000  

                                                          
1 HSV  va lues are conve rted   to  RGB  be fo re ave raging

composi tes  and   the   mean  sc ores  of  the ir   compone nt s,   fo r   each  n c  (scores  are  no rma l ized   to 
the   range   [0 ,   1]) .  The ir   actual  attractive ne ss  scores  are  repor ted   in  Tab le  1 . As   exp ected ,   the  
mean  scores  o f  the   compone nt s   ima ge s   are  ind epend ent   o f  n c,   wh ile  composi tes’   scores  
inc rease   wi th  nc. Mean  value s  of  smoo thne ss  and   asymme try  o f  the   compos ites  are  
presented  in F igur e  4b .    

0.8

0.75

0.7

0.65

0.6

0.55

2

Frac t ion of les s  at trac tive components
Composi te's  s core  (normalized)
Components ' mean score (normalized)

10
40
30
20
Numbe r of  components  in compos ite

50

0.4

0.2

0

-0.2

-0.4

-0.6

-0.8

-1

2

Smoothnes s
Asymmet ry

10
40
30
20
Number o f components  in compos ite

50

                                                                             (a)                                                                                                                      (b)

Figur e  4 :   Mean  resu lts   ove r   1 ,000   composi tes  ma de  of  va rying   numb ers  o f  ima ge  
compone nt s:   (a)   Percent   o f  compone nt s   wh ich  we re   rated   as  less   a ttractive   tha n  the ir  
correspond ing  composi te  accompan ied   wi th  mean  scores  of  composi tes  and   the   mean  scores 
of  the ir   compone nt s  (scores   are   no rma lized   to   the   range  [0 ,   1] .   actua l  a ttractive ne ss  scores  
are  repor ted   in Tab le 1) .   (b)  Mean  va lue s  o f  smoo thness  and  asymme try  o f  1 ,000  composi tes 
fo r  each  number  o f compone nt s,  nc.

Tab le 1 : Mean  resu l ts ove r  1 ,000  composi tes made of  va ryi ng  numb ers o f component   image s

NUMBER  OF  
COMPONENTS  
IN  COMPOSITE

COMPOSITE   
SCORE

COMPONENTS  
MEAN SCORE

COMPONENTS  RATED  
LOWER  THAN 
COMPOSITE  (PERCENT)

2
4
12
25
50

3 .46
3 .66
3 .74
3 .82
3 .94

3 .34
3 .33
3 .32
3 .32
3 .33

55  %
64  %
70  %
75  %
81  %

Re cent   st ud ies  ha ve   provided   evidence  tha t  sk in  text ur e  infl ue nces  judgme nt s  o f  fa cial  
attractive ne ss  [17] .   Since  b lur r ing  and   smoo thi ng  o f  fa ces  occur   when  faces   are  ave raged  
toge the r   [5] ,   the   smoo th  comp lex ion  o f  composi tes  ma y  under l ie  the   a ttractive ne ss  o f  
ave raged   compos ites.   In   our   exp er ime nt ,   a   prefe rence  fo r   ave rage ne ss  is  found   eve n   tho ugh  
our   me thod   of  vi r tua l-mo rphing  does  no t  produce  the  smoo the ning  e ffect  and   the   mean  
smoo thne ss  va lue   of   compo si tes  correspond s  to   the  me an  smoo thne ss  va lue   in  the   or igi na l 
datase t,   fo r   all  nc   (se e  Figur e   4b) .  Re se archers  ha ve   also   sugge sted   tha t  ave raged   faces  are 
attractive   si nce   the y  are  exc ep tiona lly  symme tr ic  [18] .   Figur e  4b   shows   tha t  the   mean  leve l 
of  asymme try  is  ind eed   hi ghl y  correlated   wi th  the   mean  scores  o f  the   mo rphs   (Pearson  
correlation  of  -0 .91 ,   P-va lue   <   10 -19) .   Howeve r ,   exami ni ng   the  correlation  between  the   rest  
of  the   fea tur es  and   the   composi tes '  scores   revea ls   that  thi s   hi gh   correlation  is  no t  at   all  
unique   to  asymme try.  In  fact ,  45  of  the  98  featur es  are  st rong ly  correlated  wi th  attrac t ive ne ss 
scores  ( |Pearso n  correlation |   >   0 .9) . The   high  correlation  between  the se   nume rous  featur es  
and   attract ive ne ss   scores  of  ave raged   faces  ind icates  that  symme try  leve l  is   no t  an 
excep tiona l  fac tor   in  the   machi ne ’s   prefe rence   fo r   ave raged   faces.   Ins tead ,   it   sugg est s   tha t  

ave ragi ng   cause s  ma ny  featur es,   inc lud ing  bo th  geome t r ic  featur es  and   symme try,   to   change  
in  a d irection wh ich  causes  an  inc rease  in  at tractive ne ss.    

I t  ha s   been  argued   tha t  although  ave raged   faces  are  fo und   to   be  attractive ,   ve ry  a ttractive  
faces  are   no t  ave rage   [18] .   A  vi r tua l  composi te  made  of  the   12   mo st   at tractive   faces  in  the  
se t  (as  rated   by  huma ns )   was  rated   by  the   machi ne   wi th  a  hi gh   score  of  5 .6   wh ile  1 ,000 
composi tes  made   o f  50   faces  go t  a  maximum  score  of  onl y  5 .3 .   Thi s  type  of  prefe rence  
resemb les  the   fi nd ing s  of  an  exp er imen t  by  Perrett  et  al.   in  wh ich  a  h ighl y  a ttractive  
composi te,   mo rphed   from  onl y  a ttractive   faces,   wa s  prefe rred   by  humans  ove r   a  composi te  
made of 60  ima ge s o f all levels of a ttractive ne ss  [13] .

Ano the r   st ud y  by  Za idel  et   al.   examined   the   asymme t ry  of  attract ive ne ss   percep t ion  and  
offered   a  relationship   betwe en  fa cial  attrac tivene ss  and   hemi sp he r ic  sp ec ializa tion  [19] .   In 
thi s  rese arch  r ight -r igh t and   left -l ef t ch ime r ic compo si tes  were crea ted  by at tachi ng  each  ha l f  
of  the   face   to   i ts  mi rror   ima ge .   Sub jects   we re  ask ed   to   look   at  lef t- le ft   and   r ight -r igh t  
composi tes  o f  the   same   ima ge   and   jud ge   wh ich   one  is  mo re  at tractive .   For   wome n’s   faces,  
r ight -r ight   compo si tes  go t   twice   as   ma ny  ‘mo re   attractive ’  responses  than   le ft -le ft  
composi tes.   Interes ting ly,   simi lar   resul ts  we re  fo und   whe n  s imu lating   the   same   exper iment  
wi th   the   mach ine :  R ight -r ight   and   le ft -le ft   chime r ic  composi tes  we re  created   fr om  the  
ext racted   coord ina tes  o f  each  ima ge   and   the  machi ne  wa s  used   to   pred ict  their   at trac tive ne ss  
ratings  ( taki ng  care  to  exc lude  the  or igi na l  ima ge  used   for  the  chime r ic  compo si tion  from  the  
traini ng  se t,   as  it  contains  many  featur es   wh ich  are   iden t ical  to   tho se   o f  the   composi te) .   The  
machi ne  gave  63  out  o f  91   r ight -r ight  composi tes  a h ighe r   rating  tha n  the ir  ma tchi ng  left -le ft  
composi te,   wh ile  onl y  28   le f t-le ft   composi tes  we re  judge d   as  mo re  attractive .   A  paired   t-tes t 
shows   the se   resul ts  to   be   s tatis tically  si gn if icant   wi th  P-va lue  <   10 -7   (scores  of  chime r ic  
composi tes  are   no rma lly  d is tr ibuted) .   I t  is  interes ting   to   se e  tha t  the   machi ne   ma ni fest s  the  
same   ki nd   of  asymme try  b ias  repor ted   by  Za idel  et  al,   though  it  ha s  ne ve r   been  exp lici tly 
trained   fo r  tha t.

4 D i s c u s s i o n

In  thi s  wo rk  we   produced   a  high  qua lity  traini ng   se t  fo r   learni ng  fac ial  attract ivene ss  of  
human   fa ces.   Usi ng  supervi sed   learni ng   me thodo logies   we   we re  ab le  to   cons truc t   the   fi r st  
pred ictor   tha t   ach ieves  accurate,   huma nl ike   per fo rmanc e  fo r   thi s  task.   Our   resu lts   add   the  
task  of  fac ial  attract ive ne ss  pred iction  to   a  co llection  of  abst ract  tasks   tha t  has  been  
successful ly accomp lished  wi th  cur rent  machi ne  learni ng  technique s.

Exami ni ng   the   machi ne   and   huma n  raters '  represe ntat ions   in  the   ratings  sp ace  ident ifies  the  
ratings   o f  the machi ne   in  the   center   of  huma n  raters,   and   close st ,   in  ave rage ,   to   o the r   huma n 
raters.   The   simi lar ity  betwe en  huma n  and   machi ne   pre ferences   ha s   promp ted   us  to   fur the r  
st ud y  the  machi ne ’s  operation  in  order   to  cap i talize  on  the accessib ili ty  of   its  inne r  workings  
and   learn  mo re  about   huma n  percep tion  of  facia l  attract ive ne ss.   To   thi s  end ,   we   ha ve   fo und  
tha t   tha t  the   machi ne   fa vo rs  ave raged   faces   made  of   seve ral  compone nt   faces.   Whi le   thi s  
prefe rence   is   known   to   be   common  to   huma ns  as   we l l,   rese arche r s  ha ve   prev iousl y   offe red  
d iffe ren t  reasons  fo r   favo r ing  ave ragene ss .   Our   ana lysi s   ha s  revealed   tha t  symme try  is  
st rongl y  rela ted  to  the  at trac tive ne ss  o f ave raged   faces,  but  is de fi ni te ly no t  the  on ly  factor  in  
the   equation  si nce  about   ha l f  of  the   ima ge -featur es   relate  to   the   ratings   o f  ave raged  
composi tes  in  a   simi lar   manne r   as  the   symme try  me asu re.   Thi s  sugge st s  that  a  gene ra l  
moveme nt   o f  fea tur es  towa rd   attractive ne ss,   rathe r   tha n  a  simp le  inc rease   in  symme try,   is  
respons ib le  fo r   the   at tractivene ss  o f  averaged   faces.   Obviousl y,   s tr ictly  sp eak ing  thi s  can   be 
he ld   true   onl y  fo r   the   mach ine ,   but ,   in  due   of  the   rema rkab le  ``humna like ' '  beha vi or   of  the  
machi ne ,  it also  br ings  impo r tant   suppor t to  the  idea  that  thi s  fi nd ing  ma y we ll extend  also  to  
human   percep tion   of   fa cial   attractive ne ss.   Ove rall,   it   is   qui te  surpr isi ng  and   p leasi ng  to   se e 
tha t   a  machi ne   trained   exp licitly  to   cap tur e  an  operat iona l  per fo rmance   cr iter ia   such  as  
rating,   imp lici tly  cap tur es  basic   huma n  psyc hophys ical  b iase s  rela ted   to   fac ial attrac tive ne ss .    
I t  is  like ly  tha t  wh ile   the machi ne   learns   the   rat ings  in  an  exp l icit  supervi sed  manne r ,   it  also  
concomi tant ly  and   imp licit ly  learns   o the r   basi c  cha rac ter ist ics  of  huma n  fa cial  rat ings ,   as 
revealed  by  st ud ying  its  "psychophys ics" .

A c k n o w l e d g m e n t s

We   thank  Dr .  Bernha rd   Fink   and   the   Ludwig-Bo ltzma nn   Ins ti tu te  fo r  Urban  Etho logy  at  the  
Ins t itute  fo r   Ant hropo logy,   Uni ve rs ity  of   Vienna ,   Aus tr ia,   and   P rof.   Alice  J .   O 'T oo le  from  
the  Uni ve rs ity of Texa s  a t Dallas,   fo r  ki nd ly  let ting  us  use the ir   face database s.  

R e f e r e n c e s

[1]   Langlo is,   J.H. ,   Roggman ,   L.A. ,   Casey,   R . J. ,   Ri t ter ,   J.M . ,   Rieser-Danner ,   L.A.   &  Jenki ns,   V .Y. 
(1987 )   Infan t   pre fe rences   fo r   at tract ive  fa ces:   Rud imen ts  of   a   stereo type?   Developmen ta l   Psycho logy,  
23 ,  363-369 .

[2]   Cunn ingh am,   M .R . ,   Roberts ,   A.R . ,   Wu ,   C .-H. ,   Barbee,   A.P .  &  Druen ,   P .B .   (199 5)   Th eir   ideas  of  
beau ty  are,  on   the who le,   the same as ours:  Consistency  and  va riab i l i ty  in   the cross-cu l tural  percep t ion 
of  female phys ical  at tract iveness.   Journa l  o f  Persona li ty and  So cia l  Psycho log y,  68 ,  26 1-27 9 .

[3]   Ga l ton ,   F.   (187 8)   Composi te  portrai ts.   Journa l   o f   th e  An th ropo log ica l  Inst i tu te  o f   Grea t  Bri ta in 
and  Irelan d ,  8 ,  132-142 .

[4]   Langlo is,   J.H.   &  Roggman ,   L.A.   (1990)   At tract ive   fa ces  a re  on ly  ave rage .   Psycho log ica l  Science,  
1 ,  11 5-12 1 .

[5]   Rub enstein ,   A. J. ,   Langlo is,   J.H  &   Roggman ,   L.A.   (2002)   Wh at   makes  a  fa ce  at tract ive   and   wh y:  
Th e ro le of  ave rageness  in  de fi n ing  facial  beau ty.  In  Rhodes,  G .  & Zebrowi tz,  L.A.  (eds.) ,   Advances  in 
V isua l  Cog n i t ion ,  Vo l .  1 :  Facia l  A t tract iveness,   pp .  1-33 .  Westport ,  CT:  Ab lex.

[6]   Gramme r ,   K.   &  Thornh i l l ,   R .   (199 4)   Human   (Homo   sap iens)   facial   at trat ivn ess  and   sexu al  
select ion :  Th e ro le of  symmetry  and  ave rageness.   Journa l  o f  Compara t ive Psycho log y,  108 ,  23 3-24 2 .

[7]   Li t t le,   A.C . ,   Pen ton-Voak,   I .S . ,   Burt ,   D.M .   &  Perret t ,   D.I .   (2002)   Evo lu t ion   and   ind ividual 
d iffe rences  in   the  percep t ion  of  at tract iveness:   How  cyc l ic   hormonal   change s  and   self-p erceived  
at tract iveness  in fluence  female   prefe rences  fo r   male  fa ces.   In   Rhodes,   G.   &  Zebrowi tz,   L.A.   (eds.) ,  
Advances  in  V isual  Cogn i t ion ,  Vo l .  1:  Facia l  A tt ract iveness,   pp .  59 -90.  Westport ,  CT:  Ab lex.

[8]   Cunn ingh am,   M .R . ,   Barb ee,   A.P .   &  Ph i lhowe r ,   C .L.   (2002 )   Dimensions  of  facial   phys ical 
at tract iveness:   Th e  in tersect ion   of  b io logy   and   cu l ture.   In   Rhodes,   G.   &  Zebrowi tz,   L.A.   (eds.) ,  
Advances  in  V isual  Cogn i t ion ,  Vo l .  1:  Facia l  A tt ract iveness,   pp .  19 3-23 8 .  Westport ,  CT:  Ab lex.

[9]   Thornh i l l ,   R .   &  Gangsted ,   S .W.   (1999)   Facial   At tract iveness.   Trends  in   Cogn i t ive  Sciences,   3 ,  
452-460.

[10 ]  Andersson ,  M .  (1994 )  Sexua l  Select ion .  P rinceton ,  NJ:  P rinceton  Un ive rsi ty P ress.

[11 ]  Mø l ler ,   A.P .   &  Swadd le,   J.P .   (19 97)  Asymmetry,   developmen ta l   stab i li ty,   an d   evo lu tion .  Oxfo rd :  
Oxfo rd  Un ive rsi ty P ress.

[12 ]  Zebrowi tz,  L.A.  & Rhodes,  G.   (2002)  Nature  let  a hundred  flowe rs  b loom:  Th e mu l t ip le ways  and  
where fo res  o f  at tract iveness.   In   Rhodes,   G.   &  Zebrowi tz,   L.A.   (eds.) ,   Advances  in   V isua l   Cogn i t ion , 
Vo l .  1:  Facia l  A tt ract iveness,  pp .  26 1-29 3 .  Westport ,  CT:  Ab lex.

[13 ]   Perret t ,   D.I . ,   May,   K.A.   &  Yosh ikawa ,   S .   (1994)   fa cial   shape   and   judgmen ts  o f   female 
at tract iveness.  Na ture,  368 ,  23 9-242 .

[14 ]   O´Too le,   A. J. ,   P rice,   T. ,   Vet ter ,   T. ,   Bart let t ,   J.C .   &  Blanz,   V .    (19 99 )   3D  shape  and   2D   surfa ce  
textures  o f   human   faces:   the   ro le  of   "average s"   in   at trac t iveness   and   age .   Image  and   V ision  
Compu t ing ,  18 ,  9 -19 .

[15 ]   Johnston,  V.  S.  &  Franklin,  M.  (1993)  Is  beauty  in  the   eye   of  the  beho lder?  E tho logy  an d 
Sociob io log y,  14 ,  18 3-19 9 .

[16 ]   E isen thal ,   Y. ,  Dror ,   G.   &  Rupp in,   E .   (2006 )   Facial   at tract iveness:   Beau ty  and   the  Mach ine. 
Neura l  Compu ta t ion ,  18 ,  119-142 .

[17 ]  Fink, B., Grammer, K. & Thornhill, R. (2001) Human (Homo sapiens) Facial Attractiveness in Relation 
to Skin Texture and Color. Journal of Comparative Psychology, 115, 92–99.

[18 ]   Al ley,   T.R .   &  Cunn ingh am,   M .R .   (1991)   Ave raged   faces  are  at tract ive  bu t   very  at tract ive   faces 
are no t  ave rage .  Psycho log ica l  S cience,  2 ,  123 -125 .

[19 ]   Zaidel ,   D.W. ,   Chen ,   A.C .   &  Ge rman ,   C .   (1995)   She  is   no t   a  beau ty  even   when   sh e  smi les:  
possib le  evo lu t ionary  basis  fo r   a  relat ionsh ip   between   fa cial   at tract iveness  and   hemi spheric 
special izat ion .  Neuropsycho logia ,  33 (5 ) ,  649 -655

