Learning Structural Equation Models for fMRI

Amos J. Storkey
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh

Enrico Simonotto
Division of Psychiatry
University of Edinburgh

Heather Whalley
Division of Psychiatry
University of Edinburgh

Stephen Lawrie
Division of Psychiatry
University of Edinburgh

Lawrence Murray
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh

David McGonigle
Centre for Functional Imaging Studies
University of Edinburgh

Abstract

Structural equation models can be seen as an extension of Gaussian belief net-
works to cyclic graphs, and we show they can be understood generatively as the
model for the joint distribution of long term average equilibrium activity of Gaus-
sian dynamic belief networks. Most use of structural equation models in fMRI
involves postulating a particular structure and comparing learnt parameters across
different groups. In this paper it is argued that there are situations where priors
about structure are not ﬁrm or exhaustive, and given sufﬁcient data, it is worth
investigating learning network structure as part of the approach to connectivity
analysis. First we demonstrate structure learning on a toy problem. We then show
that for particular fMRI data the simple models usually assumed are not supported.
We show that is is possible to learn sensible structural equation models that can
provide modelling beneﬁts, but that are not necessarily going to be the same as a
true causal model, and suggest the combination of prior models and learning or
the use of temporal information from dynamic models may provide more beneﬁts
than learning structural equations alone.

1 Introduction
Structural equation modelling (SEM) is a technique widely used in the behavioural sciences. It has
also appeared as a standard approach for analysis of what has become known as effective connectivity
in the functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) literature and is still in common use despite the
increasing interest in dynamical methods such as dynamic causal models [6]. Simply put, effective
connectivity analysis involves looking at the possible causal inﬂuences between brain regions given
measurements of the activity of those regions. Structural equation models are a Gaussian modelling
tool, and are similar to Gaussian belief networks. In fact Gaussian belief networks can be seen as
a subset of valid structural equation models. However structural equation models do not have the
same acyclicity constraints as belief networks. It should be noted that the graphical form used in
this paper is at odds with traditional SEM representations, and consistent with that used for belief
networks, as those will be more familiar to the expected audience.
Within the fMRI context, the use of structural equation generally takes the following form. First
certain regions of interests (commonly called seeds) are chosen according to some understanding
of what brain regions might be of interest or of importance. Then neurobiological knowledge is
used to propose a connectivity model. This connectivity model states what regions are connected
to what other regions, and the direction of the connectivity. This connectivity model is used to
deﬁne a structural equation model. The parameters of this model are then typically estimated using
maximum likelihood methods, and then comparison of connection parameters is made across subject
classes.

In this paper we consider what can be done when it is hard to specify connectivity a priori, and ask
how much we can achieve by learning network structures from the fMRI data itself. The novel de-
velopments of this paper include the examination of various generative representations for structural
equation models which allow straightforward comparisons with belief networks and other models
such as dynamic causal models. We implement Bayesian Information Criterion approximations to
the evidence and use this in a Metropolis-Hastings sampling scheme for learning structural equation
models. These models are then applied to toy data, and to fMRI data, which allows the examination
of the types of assumptions typically made.
1.1 Related Work: Structural Equation Models
Structural equation models and path analysis have a long history. The methods were introduced in
the context of genetics in [20], and in econometrics in [7]. They have been used extensively in the
social sciences in a variety of ways. Linear Gaussian structural equation models can be split into the
case of path analysis [20], where the all the variables are directly measurable and structural equation
models with latent variables [1], where latent variable models are allowed. Factor analysis is another
special case of this latter. Furthermore structural equation models can also be characterised by the
inclusion of exogenous inﬂuences.
Structural equation models have been analysed and understood in Bayesian terms before. They form
a part of the causal modelling framework of Pearl [11], and have been discussed within that context,
as well as a number of others [11, 4, 13, 10]. Approaches to learning structural equation models
have not played a signiﬁcant part in fMRI methods. One approach is described in [3] where they use
a genetic algorithm approach for the search. In [21], the authors look at learning Bayesian networks
but do not consider cyclic networks. For dynamic causal models (rather than structural equation
models) the issue of model comparison was dealt with in [12], but large scale structure learning was
not considered.
In fMRI literature, SEMs have generally been used to model ‘effective connectivity’, or rather mod-
elling the causal relationships between different brain regions. They were ﬁrst applied to imaging
data by [9], and there have been many further applications [2, 5, 14]. The ﬁrst analysis on data from
schizophrenia studies was detailed in [15]. In fact it seems SEMs have been the most widely used
model for connectivity analyses in neuroimaging. In all of the studies cited above the underlying
structure was presumed known or presumed to be one of a small number of possibilities. There has
been some discussion of how best to obtain reasonable structures from neuro-anatomical data, but
this approach is currently used only very rarely.
2 Why Learn SEMs?
The presumption in much fMRI connectivity analysis is that we can obtain models for activity
dependence from neuro-anatomical sources. The problem with this is that it fails to account for
the fact that connectivity analysis is usually done with a limited number of regions. It is highly
possible that a connection from one region to another is mediated via a third region, which is not
included in the SEM model. The strength of that mediation is unknown from neuro-anatomical data
and is generally ignored: most connectivity models focus only on direct anatomical connections,
with the accompanying implicit assumption that there are no other regions involved in the network
under study, or that these regions would contribute only minimally to the model. Furthermore, just
because regions are physically connected does not mean there is any actual functional inﬂuence in
a particular context. Hence it has to be accepted that neuro-anatomically derived connectivity is a
ﬁrst guess at best.
It is not the purpose of this paper to propose that anatomical connectivity be ignored, but instead
it asks what happens if we go to the other extreme: can we say something about connectivity from
the data? In reality anatomical connectivity models are needed, and can be used to provide good
priors for the connections and even for the relative connection strengths. Statistically there are huge
equivalences in structural equation models that will not be determined by the data alone.
3 Understanding Structural Equation Models
In this section two generative views of structural equation modelling are presented. The idea behind
structural equation modelling is that it represents causal dependence between different variables.
The fact that cyclic structures are allowed in structural equation models could be seen as an implicit
assumption of some underlying dynamic which the structural equation model is an equilibrium rep-

resentation of. Indeed that is commonly how effective connectivity models are interpreted in an
fMRI context. Two linear models, both of which produce a structural equation model prior, are pre-
sented here. Though these models have the same statistical properties, they have different generative
motivations and different non-linear extensions, so they are both potentially instructive.
3.1 The Traditional Model
The standard SEM view is that the core SEM structure is a covariance produced by the solution to a
set of linear equations x = Ax + ω with Gaussian term ω . This does not have any direct generative
elucidation, but can instead be thought of as relating to a deterministic dynamical system subject to
uncertain ﬁxed input. Suppose we have a dynamical system xt+1 = Axt + ω , subject to some input
ω , where we presume the system input is unknown and Gaussian distributed. To generate from the
model, we sample ω , run the dynamical system to its ﬁxed point, and use that ﬁxed point as a sample
of x. This ﬁxed point is given by x = (I − A)−1ω which produces the standard SEM covariance
structure for x. This requires A to be a contraction map to obtain stable ﬁxed points. All the other
aspects of the general form of SEM are either inputs to or measurements from this system.
3.2 Average Activity Of A Gaussian Dynamic Bayesian Network
An alternative and potentially appealing view is that the the SEM represents the distribution of the
long term activity of the nodes in a Gaussian dynamic Bayesian network (Kalman ﬁlter). Sup-
pose we have xt = Axt−1 + ω t , where ω t are IID Gaussian variables, and x0 , x1 , . . . is a se-
(cid:80)N
ries of real variables. This deﬁnes a Markov chain, and is the evolution equation of a Gaus-
(cid:80)N
(cid:80)N
(cid:80)N
√
sian dynamic Bayesian network. Suppose we are at the equilibrium distribution of this Markov
chain. Then setting ˜x = (1/
N )
t=1 xt for large N , we can use the Kalman ﬁlter to see that
√
√
√
N )[A(x0 − xN ) + A
√
N )
t=1 xt = (1/
i=1 xt ] + (1/
N )
(1/
t=1 ω t . Presuming A is a
N )[A(x0 − xN )] becomes negligibly small and so ˜x ≈ A ˜x + ω where ω is
contraction map, (1/
distributed identically to ω t due to the fact that the variance of a sum of Gaussians is the sum of the
variances. The approximation becomes an equality in the large N limit. Again this is the required
form for obtaining the covariance of the SEM.
This interpretation says that if we have some latent system running as a Gaussian dynamic Bayesian
network, but our measuring equipment is only capable of capturing longer term averages of the
network activity then our measurements are distributed according to an SEM. This generative inter-
pretation is appealing in the context of fMRI acquisition. Note in both of these interpretations that it
is important that A is a contraction. By formulating the generative framework we see it is important
to restrict the form of connectivity model in this way.
4 Model Structure
The standard formalism for Structural Equation Models is now outlined. A structural equation
model for observational variables y, latent variables, x and sometimes for latent input variables φ
and observations of the input variables z is given by the following equations
x = (I − A)−1 (Rφ + ω), y = Bx + σ and z = C φ + δ

(1)

where σ , ω , φ and δ are Gaussian, and A is presumed to be zero diagonal.
(cid:19)
(cid:18)
For for S = I − A, the resulting covariance for the observed variables (y, z) is given by
BS−1 (RKφRT + Kω )[S−1 ]T + Kσ BS−1RKφC T
CKφRT [S−1 ]T B T
CKφC T + Kδ
where Kω is the covariance of ω , Kσ the covariance of σ etc. There are a number of common
simpliﬁcations to this framework. The ﬁrst case involves presuming no inputs and a fully visible
system. Hence we marginalise the observations of the input variables z, set Kδ = ∞, C = 0
,R = 0, B = 1, σ = 0. Then the covariance K1 of y is K1 = (I − A)−1Kω [(I − A)−1 ]T .
The next simplest case would involve presuming once again that there are no inputs but that in fact
the observations are stochastic functions of the latent variables. This involves setting Kδ = ∞,
C = 0, R = 0, B = 1. We then have K2 = (I − A)−1Kω [(I − A)−1 ]T + Kσ . If we view the
observations as noisy versions of the latent variables then Kσ is diagonal. This will be the most
general case considered in this paper. Adding any of the remaining components is not particularly
demanding as it simply uses a conditional rather than unconditional model.

(2)

.

(3)

(4)

Suppose we denote by K the covariance corresponding to the required model. For most of this
(cid:182)
(cid:181)
(cid:89)
paper we presume K = K2 . We then have the following probability for the whole data Y =
{y1 , y2 , . . . , yN }.
− 1
1
(yj − ¯y)T K −1 (yj − ¯y)
P (Y |K, ¯y) =
(2π)m/2 |K |1/2
2
j
where the observable model mean is ¯y = ¯x + ¯σ and the latent mean is ¯x = (I − A)−1 ¯ω , and where
σ and ω , along with elements of the matrix A and covariances Kω and Kσ , are parameters.
5 Priors, Maximum Posterior and Bayesian Information Criterion
The previous section outlines the basic model of the data given the various parameters. In this section
(cid:181)
(cid:182)
we provide prior distributions for the parameters of the structural equation model.
Independent
Gaussian priors are put on the parameters:
− 1
P (Aij |T ) = T 1/2
2 T (Aij − ¯Aij )2
(2π)1/2
with regularisation parameter T . For the purposes of this paper we take ¯Aij = 0, presume we
have no particular a priori bias towards positive or negative connections and a uniform prior over
structures. An independent prior over connections seems reasonable as two separate connections
between different brain regions would have no a priori reason to be related. Any relationship is due
to functional purpose and is therefore a posteriori. The use of a uniform prior over all structures is
an extreme position, which we have taken in this paper to contrast with using only one structure. In
reality we would want to use neurobiologically guided priors over structures.
Inverse gamma priors were also speciﬁed for Kω and Kσ originally, along with a prior for the
mean ¯ω . It was found that these typically had no effects on the experiments and were dropped for
simplicity. Hence Kω and Kσ will be optimised without regularisation, and ¯ω is set to zero. T is
chosen by 10 fold cross-validation from a set of 10 possible values.
We can calculate all the relevant derivatives for the SEM straightforwardly, and adapt the parameters
to maximize the posterior of the structural equation model. In this paper we use a conjugate gradient
approach. By adding a Bayesian Information Criterion term [16], (−0.5m log N ) for m parameters
and N data points, to the log posterior at the maximum posterior solution, we can obtain an approx-
imation of the evidence P (Y |M ) where M encodes the structural information we are interested in
and consists of indicator variables Mij indicating a connection for node j to node i. This will enable
us to sample from an approximate posterior distribution of structures to ﬁnd a sample which best
represents the data.
6 Sampling From SEMs
In order to represent the posterior distribution over network structures, we resort to a sampling ap-
proach. Because there are no acyclicity constraints, MCMC proposals are simpler than the compa-
rable situation for belief networks in that no acyclicity checking needs to be done for the proposals.
A simple proposal scheme is to randomly generate a swap matrix MS which is XORed with M . We
choose highly sparse swap matrices, but to reduce the possibility of transitioning randomly about the
larger graphs, without ever considering smaller networks we introduce a bias towards removing con-
nections rather than adding connections in generating the swap matrix. This means the proposal is
no longer symmetric, and so a corresponding Hastings factor needs to be included in the acceptance
probability, so the result is still a sample from the original posterior.
7 Tests On A Toy Problem
We tested the approach on a toy problem with 8 variables. We sampled 800 data points from y =
(I −A)−1 +ρ for  Gaussian with unit diagonal covariance, ρ Gaussian with 0.2 diagonal covariance
and with A given by 0

0
0
0
0
−0.17
0.31
0.385

−0.03
0
0
0.55
0
0
−0.03 −0.08
−0.25
0
0
0
0
0
0.5
0

0
0
0.47
0
0
0
−0.36
0
0
0.27
0
0.49
0.42 −0.13
0
0

−0.26
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
−0.36
0.34
0
0
−0.18
0
0.16

exp

exp

0
0
0
0.25
0
0
−0.22
0

This connectivity matrix is represented graphically in Figure 11. In modelling this we used T =
10. This prior ensures that any A that is not of very low prior probability is a contraction. Also
contraction constraints were added to the optimisation. Priors on other parameters were set to be
broad. An annealed sampling procedure was used for the ﬁrst 4000 samples from the Metropolis-
Hastings Monte-Carlo procedure. After that a further 4000 samples burn-in was used. The next
4000 samples were used for analysis.
We assess what edges are common in the samples, and what the highest posterior sampled graphs
are. Figure 1b provides illustrations of edges which are present in more than 0.15 of the samples. It
can be seen that many of the critical edges are there in most samples (indeed some are always there).
Those which are missing in both cases tend to be either low magnitude connections or are due to
directional confusion.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: (a) Graphical structure of the ground truth model for the toy data, and (b) Edges present in more
than 0.15 of the cases, (c) the highest posterior structure from the sample (d) a random sample.
The graphs for the maximum posterior sample and a random sample are shown in Figure 1. We can
see that again in the maximum posterior sample, there is a misplaced edge (the edge from 5 to 6 is
replaced by one from 5 to 1) and a number are missing or have exchanged direction. The samples
generally have likelihoods which are very similar to the likelihood for the true model.
We can conclude from this that we can gain some information from learning SEM structures, but as
with learning any graphical models there are many symmetries and equivalences, so it is vital not to
infer too much from the learnt structures.
8 Tests On fMRI Data
The approach of this paper was tested on two different fMRI datasets. The ﬁrst dataset (D1) was
taken from a dataset that had previously used to examine inter-session variance in a single subject [8,
17]. We used the auditory paced ﬁnger-tapping task; brieﬂy, a single subject tapped his right index
ﬁnger, paced by an auditory tone (1.5Hz). Each activation epoch was alternated with a rest epoch,
in which the pacing tone was delivered to control for auditory activation. Thirteen blocks were
collected per session (seven rest and six active). Each block was 24s/6 scans long, making 78 scans
in total for each of 33 sessions. The subject maintained ﬁxation on a cross that was backprojected
onto a transparent screen by a LCD video projector as in previous experiments.
The subject was a healthy 23 year old right-handed male. The data were acquired on a Siemens
MAGNETOM Vision (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) at 2T. Each BOLD-EPI volume scan consisted
of 48 transverse slices (inplane matrix 64x64; voxel size 3x3x3mm; TE=40ms; TR=4.1s). A T1-
weighted high-resolution MRI of the subject (1 x 1 x 1.5mm resolution) was acquired to facilitate
anatomical localisation of the functional data.
The data were processed with statistical parametric mapping (SPM) software SPM5 (Wellcome
Department of Cognitive Neurology; www.ﬁl.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm). After removal of the ﬁrst two
volumes to account for T1 saturation effects, cerebral volumes were realigned to correct for both
within- and between-session subject motion). The data were ﬁltered with a 128s high-pass ﬁlter,
and an AR(1)-model was used to account for serial correlation in the data Experimental effects were
estimated using session design matrices modeling the hemodynamically convolved time-course of
the active movement condition, and 6 subject movement parameters. Note that no spatial smoothing
was applied to this dataset, to attempt to preserve single-voxel timeseries.
Seeds were selected from signiﬁcantly active voxels identiﬁed using a random effects analysis in
SPM5 (ones-sample t-test across 33 sessions; p < 0.05 FWE corrected for multiple comparsions).

For comparison with previous extant work, the most signiﬁcant voxel in each cluster was chosen
as a seed, giving 13 seeds representing 13 separate anatomical regions. When it was obvious that
a given cluster encompassed more than one distinct anatomical region, seeds were also selected for
other regions covered by the cluster. 2000 data points were used for training, the remaining 574
were reserved as a test set.
The second dataset (D2) was from a long term study of subjects who are at genetically enhanced risk
of schizophrenia. Imaging was carried out on 90 subjects at the Brain Imaging Research Centre for
Scotland (Edinburgh, Scotland, UK) on a GE 1.5 T Signa scanner. A high resolution structural scan
was acquired using a 3D T1-weighted sequence (TI = 600 ms). Functional data was acquired using
an EPI sequence. A total of 204 volumes were acquired. The ﬁrst four volumes of each acquisition
were discarded. Preliminary analysis was carried out using SPM99. Data were ﬁrst realigned to
correct for head movement, normalized to the standard EPI template and smoothed.
The resulting data consists of a image-volume series of 200 time points for each of the remaining
90 patients. The voxel time courses were temporally ﬁltered. In order to reduce task related effects,
we modelled the task conditions with standard block effects (Hayling), all convolved with canonical
hemodynamical response functions, and ﬁtted a general linear model (which also included regressors
for the estimated head movement) to the time ﬁltered data; the residuals of this procedure were used
as the data for all the work described in this paper. The full data set was split into two halves, a
training and a test set. Data from 45 of the subjects was used for training and 45 for testing.
For an effective connectivity analysis, a number of brain regions (seeds) were chosen on the basis
of the results of a functional connectivity study [19] and taking regard of areas which may be of
particular clinical interest. In total 14 regions were chosen, along with their 14 cross-hemisphere
counterparts. Hence we are interested in learning a 28 by 28 connectivity matrix.
8.1 Learning SEM Structure
For both datasets a similar procedure to the toy example was followed for learning structure for the
fMRI data. The stability of the log posterior along with estimations of cross-correlation against lag
were used as heuristics to determine convergence prior to obtaining 10000 sample points.
Assuming a fully visible path analysis (covariance K1 ) model, where no measurement noise is in-
cluded is typical in fMRI analysis (e.g. [15] for a Schizophrenia studies), we found that samples
from the posterior of this model were in fact so highly connected that displaying them would infea-
sible. For D2 a connectivity of 350 of the 752 total possible connections was typical. However note
that only 376 connections are needed to fully specify a general covariance. Hence we can assume
that in this situation the data is not suggesting any particular structure in the data which is reasonably
amenable to path analysis.
We can generalise the path analysis model by making the region activities latent variables, and allow
the measurement variables to be noisy versions of those regions. In SEM terms this is equivalent to
assuming the covariance structure given by K2 . A repeat of the whole procedure with this covariance
results in much smaller structures. We focus on this approach.
For dataset D1, we sample posterior structures given the training data with T = 100. There is
notable variation in these structures although some key links (eg Left Motor Cortex (L M1) to Left
Posterior Parietal Cortex (L PPC) are included in most samples. In addition an a priori connectivity

(a)

(b)

Figure 2: Structure for (a) the hand speciﬁed model (b) the highest posterior sample.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 3: Graphical structure for (a) the highest posterior structure from the sample (b) random sample. (c) a
sample from the two tier model. The regions are Inferior Frontal Gyrus, Medial Frontal Gyrus, Ant. Cingulate,
Frontal Operculum, Superior Frontal Gyrus, Middle Frontal Gyrus, Superior Temporal Gyrus, Middle Temporal
Gyrus, Insula, Thalamus, Amygdala Hippocampal Region, Cuneus/Precuneus, Inferior Parietal Lobule and
Posterior Cerebellum.

structure is proposed for the regions in the study, taking into account the task involved. This was ob-
tained by using knowledge of neuroanatomical connectivity drawn from studies using tract-tracing in
non-human primates. It was produced independent of the connectivity analysis and without knowl-
edge of its results, but taking into account the seed locations and their corresponding activities. Note
that this is a simple ﬁnger tapping motor task with seeds corresponding to the associated regions.
Though not trivial, we would expect the speciﬁcation to be easier and more accurate here than for
more complicated cognitive tasks, due to the high number of papers using this task in functional
neuroimaging. Task D1 is also of note due to its focus on repeated scanning in a single individual,
thus negating any problems in seed selection that may arise from inter-subject spatial variance.
These two cases described above are speciﬁed as different hypothesised models. We denote the
hand-speciﬁed structure MH and we select the maximum a posteriori sample ML (for ”Learnt
Model”) as a potential alternative. The two structures are illustrated in Figure 2. The maximum
a posteriori parameters are then estimated for the two models using the same conjugate gradient
procedure on the same dataset. These two models are then used predictively on the remaining un-
seen test data. We compute the predictive log-likelihoods for each model. We ﬁnd that the best
predictive log-likelihoods for each approach are the same (3SF) for both models. They are also the
same as the predictive likelihood using the full sample covariance, which given the large data sizes
used is well speciﬁed. Both these models perform better than other random models with equivalent
numbers of connections. In reality learnt models are going to be used in new situations and situa-
tions with less data. One test of the appropriateness of a model is to assess its predictive capability
when trained on little data. By estimating the model parameters on 100 data points, instead of 2000,
we ﬁnd that the learnt model performs very slightly better than the hand speciﬁed model (log odds
ratio of 63 on a 574 point test set), and both perform better than the full covariance (log odds of 292).
This indicates that both MH and ML are providing salient reduced representations which capture
useful characteristics of the data.
We also ran tests on D2. Maximum posterior samples and a random sample are illustrated in Figure
3. Note that although these samples appear to still be quite highly connected, they in fact have about
130 connections. Even so this is signiﬁcantly greater than the idealised connectivity structures
typically used in most studies.
One further approach is to assume a fully connected structure, but where the connectivity is in two
categories. We have priors on connectivity with the same values of Tij as before for the strong
connections and much larger values for the weaker connections. When this is added to the form
of the model (where we make the incorrect but practical assumption that the BIC assumption still
holds for the stronger connections) we obtain even simpler structures. Following this procedure
we ﬁnd that models of the form of 3c are typical samples from the posterior where only the larger

connections are shown. Again connections such as those between the Cuneus/Precuneus and the
Superior Frontal Gyrus, the Thalamic connections, and some of the cross-hemispheric connections
are amongst those that would be expected. This approach is related to recent work on the use of
sparse priors for effective connectivity [18].
9 Future Directions
This work demonstrates that if we learn structural equation models from data, we ﬁnd there is little
evidence for the simple forms of path analysis model which is in common use in the fMRI literature.
We suggest that learning connectivity can be a reasonable complement to current procedures where
prior speciﬁcation is hard. Learning on its own does discover useful parameterised representations,
but these parameterisations are not the same as reasonable prior speciﬁcations. This is unsurprising
due to the statistical equivalence of many SEM structures. It should be expected that combining
learnt structures with prior anatomical models will help in the speciﬁcation of more accurate con-
nectivity assumptions, as it will reduce the number of equivalence and focus on more reasonable
structural forms. Furthermore future comparisons can be made using a sample of reasonable models
instead of a single a priori chosen model. We would also expect that the major gains in learning
models with come from the focus on dynamical networks which do not suffer from speciﬁcity prob-
lems. Even if the level of temporal information is small, any temporal information provides handles
for inferring causality that are unavailable with static equilibrium models.
References
[1] K. A. Bollen. Structural Equations with Latent Variables. John Wiley and Sons, 1989.
[2] C. Buchel, J.T. Coull, and K.J. Friston. The preedictive value of changes in effective connectivity for
human learning. Science, 283:1528–1541, 1999.
[3] E. Bullmore, B. Howitz, G. Honey, M. Brammer, S. Williams, and T. Sharma. How good is good enough
in path analysis of fMRI data? Neuroimage, 11:289–301, 2000.
[4] D. Dash. Restructing dynamic causal systems in equilibrium. In Proc. Uncertainty in AI 2005, 2005.
[5] K.J. Friston and C. Buchel. Attentional modulation of effective connectivity from V2 to V5/MT in hu-
mans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciecnes, 97:7591–7596, 2000.
[6] K.J. Friston, L. Harrison, and W.D. Penny. Dynamic causal modelling. NeuroImage, 19:1273–1302,
2003.
[7] T. Haavelmo. The statistical implications of a system of simultaneous equations. Econometrica, 11:1–12,
1943.
[8] D. McGonigle, A. Howseman, B. Athwal, K.J. Friston, R. Frackowiak, and A. Holmes. Variability in
fmri: An examination of intersession differences. Neuroimage, 11:708–734, 2000.
[9] A. R. McIntosh and F. Gozales-Lima. Structural equation modelling and its application to network anal-
ysis in functional brain imaging. Human Brain Mapping, 2:2–22, 1994.
[10] C. Glymour P. Spirtes and R. Scheines. Causation, Prediction and Search. MIT Press, 2 edition, 2001.
[11] J. Pearl. Causality. Cambridge University Press, 2000.
[12] W.D. Penny, K.E. Stephan, A. Mechelli, and K.J. Friston. Comparing dynamic causal models. Neuroim-
age, 22:1157–1172, 2004.
[13] T. Richardson. A discovery algorithm for directed cyclic graphs. In Proceedings of the 12th Conference
on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 1996.
[14] J. Rowe, K.E. Stephan, K. Friston, R. Frackowiak, A. Lees, and R. Passingham. Attention to action in
Parkinsons disease. Brain, 125:276–289, 2002.
[15] R. Schlosser, T. Gesierich, B. Kauffman, G. Vucurevic, S. Hunsche, J. Gawehn, and P. Stoeter. Altered
effective connectivity during working memory performance in schizophrenia: a study with fMRI and
structural equation modeling. Neuroimage, 19:751–763, 2003.
[16] G. Schwarz. Estimating the dimension of a model. Annals of Statistics, 6:461–464, 1978.
[17] S.M.Smith, C.F. Beckmann, N. Ramnani, M.W. Woolrich, P.R. Bannister, M. Jenkinson, P.M. Matthews,
and D. McGonigle. Variability in fMRI: A re-examination of intersession differences. Human Brain
Mapping, 24:248–257, 2005.
[18] P.A. Valdes Sosa, J.M. Sanchez-Bornot, A. Lage-Castellanos, M. Vega-Hernandez, J. Bosch Bayard,
L. Melie-Garcia, and E. Canales-Rodriguez. Estimating brain functional connectiivty with sparse multi-
variate autoregression. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society onf London B Biological Sciences,
360:969–981, 2005.
[19] H.C. Whalley, E. Simonotto, I. Marshall, D.G.C Owens, N.H. Goddard, E.C. Johnstone, and S.M. Lawrie.
Functional disconnectivity in subjects at high genetic risk of schizophrenia. Brain, 128:2097–2108, 2005.
[20] S. Wright. Correlation and causation. Journal of Agricultural Research, 20:557–585, 1921.
[21] X. Zheng and J. C. Rajapakse. Learning functional structure from fMR images. Neuroimage, 31:1601–
1613, 2006.

