A dynamic excitatory-inhibitory network in a VLSI
chip for spiking information reregistration

Juan Huo
Zhengzhou University
Shanghai Jiaotong University
juanhuo@126.com

Abstract

Inhibitory synapse is an important component both in physiology and artiﬁcial
neural network, which has been widely investigated and used. A typical inhibitory
synapse in very large scale integrated (VLSI) circuit is simpliﬁed from related
research and applied in a VLSI chip for spike train reregistration. The spike train
reregistration network is derived from a neural network model for sensory map
realignment for network adaptation. In this paper, we introduce the design of spike
train registration in CMOS circuit and analyze the performance of the inhibitory
network in it, which shows representative characters for the ﬁring rate of inhibited
neuron and information transmission in circuit compared to math model.

1

Introduction

A number of circuits have been designed for spiking neurons and networks [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. In-
hibitory synapse plays an important role in lateral inhibition and winner-take-all networks, which
are widely used in neural networks and applied in psychophysics, speech, perception and adaptive
pattern recognition [8, 9]. We designed a dynamic excitatory-inhibitory network with the most com-
mon circuit components from [1, 8, 9, 10, 11] and applied it to a VLSI chip for spiking information
reregistration. This chip is designed for sensory information integration. Correlation and mutual in-
formation between the sensory information are very important for cognition and perception [12, 13].
It is discovered in biology, the correlated visual and auditory stimuli can register with each other in a
bimodal neuron after being transmitted through a long information pathway involving different brain
areas in a Superior Colliculus (SC) [14, 15]. In previous work [4, 16, 17], a mathematical model
is built emulating the visual and auditory map realignment in the barn owl SC which is caused
by an enforced environmental change, prism wearing. Both the simulation result and the robotic
experiment show the model works well for the adaptive visual and auditory information registration
in the SC network. However, the data computation during robot experiment is slow. So is the data
communication speed whose transmission speed is limited by Bluetooth serial port. A VLSI circuit
in this paper is thereby designed and fabricated in AMS 0.35µm process to speed up the system. It
is also used as a bio-inspired network circuit to adapt spike transmission. The adaptation process is
like this: when two input spike trains are correlated and registered with each other and they come
through the same sensory information pathway, the adaptation process will not occur and the two
input will be integrated by a bimodal neuron. In the other case, if the two input spike trains are
unregistered with each other, adaptation process will start from the inhibitory network.
The function of this inhibitory network in adaptation is to generate the “Map Adaptation
Cue”(MAC), which is a spike train to induce changes of network connection. Updating of the
connections will continue until the input spike trains are registered again. This circuit emulates the
adjustment of connections caused by map shift in the midbrain. Its VLSI design is described in
section 3.1, in which the circuit of inhibitory network follows the rule of Spike Timing Dependent

1

Plasticity (STDP). Inhibition towards the interneuron, which generates MAC spikes, is modulated
by the synaptic weight change. The modulation in VLSI circuit is basically consistent with mathe-
matical model, however, they are different in the changing ratio of MAC density and timing. Details
of the related discussion are in section 3.2. As a basic component of large neural network, there
has been rare concern about the difference for spike generation between the on chip synapse and the
mathematical model due to the transistor characters. This difference can induce different changing
ratio of spike density between the mathematical and the circuit result, although the input spike trains
are the same.

2 SC model and circuit

Fig. 1(a) is a micrograph of this SC chip, in which digital block and analog block sit side by side
in just 0.6mm × 0.5mm area. This chip has 4 neurons and 6 synapses and corresponds to the
network model in Fig. 1(a). The power supply current is less than 10mA at 3.3V. Two information
pathways are selected as the basic platform to simulate the visual and auditory integration, whose
corresponding network model is shown in Fig. 1(b), which is basically two of the ten pathways in
SC network in [16]. Input spike trains come from two sides, on the right is V side and on the left is
A side. Since this model is derived from point to point projection between the SC and the external
Inferior Colliculus in the midbrain, spike trains from the two sides represent different sensory stimuli
sources (visual and auditory input in [16]). The inputs in the same information pathway normally
are correlated and supposed to be integrated on the bimodal neuron of SC [15, 18]. Fig. 1(b)
describes the situation that the correlated input spike trains are in different information pathways.
This disparity induced the MAC spike train. When the density of MAC spike train is high enough,
the new axon connection between ICc and ICx will be triggered and the network will be changed to
redirect the spike train in the A side spike A to pathway 1 where it can integrate with the spike train
in the V side spike V.
The whole circuit includes an analog and a digital network which are separated with each other. The
analog part of the circuit is two paralleled ‘inhibitory networks’. In the sensory map, two central
stimuli induced spike trains spike A and spike V are supposed to be integrated in one bimodal neu-
ron of SC neuron N1, but they are in different pathways. The disparity between the spike V and
another input on pathway 1 caused the decrease of synaptic weight related to N1, which also de-
creases the inhibition towards interneuron N2 to ﬁre MAC spikes. The high MAC density triggered
a new connection which is represented by a red dashed line.
The inhibitory network is further shown in Fig. 2(a), which is not limited to SC model and can
be applied to the other circuit. The basic computing units for the analog network are neurons and
synapses. The inhibitory neural network in Fig. 2(a) has two neighboring neurons N1 and N2, they
are leaky integrate and ﬁre (LIF) neurons. Neuron N2 is inhibited by the output spikes from neuron
N1. Not like the bimodal neuron N1, the interneuron N2 only accesses one spike train source and
is inhibited by the inhibitory synapse circuit which leaks the current from the IF neuron membrane.
Thus the output ﬁring rate of the interneuron N2 is inversely proportional to the output ﬁring rate
of the bimodal neuron. This is also called shunt inhibition in some articles [1, 6, 12]. Shunting is
an important type of gain control in biology to regulate neural responses. In this inhibitory VLSI
circuit, both interneuron and bimodal neuron are IF neurons, whose circuit includes features from
[1, 3, 5]. The parameters of the circuit in Fig. 2 are conﬁgured so that the interneuron N2’s ﬁring
rate is lower than the other IF neuron and its neuron membrane threshold is set to be higher than the
other neurons.
The excitatory synapses in Fig. 2(a) connects to neuron N1 with Spike Timing Dependent Plasticity
(STDP). The STDP circuit is a circuit component wired with Fig. 2(b) through V w . Details of this
kind of circuit can be seen in [3, 4]. The output current (Isyn), which is connected to IF neuron
membrane capacitor of the neuron circuit, is proportional to V w and switched on or off by Vspike
and Vbias. Vspike is a train of input spike pulses, which can turns on transistor M2 in Fig. 2(b) and
induces the spike current.
A simple inhibitory synapse shown in Fig. 2(c) discharges the membrane capacitor voltage of the
neuron N2 in Fig. 2(a). The degree of the inhibition is determined by Vpbias and Vdec. By adjusting
the Vpbias and Vdec, Vshunt is changed. A higher voltage value of Vshunt on the transistor gate
increases the inhibitory synaptic conductance and a lower voltage of Vshunt on the transistor gate

2

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: SC chip and network diagram.
In each
(a) Micrograph of mixed signal SC chip.
pathway, the analog block includes 4 neurons and synapses. The digital block has 4 switches,
registers and 8 spike calculators, while the size of the chip in total is only 0.6mm × 0.5mm. (b)
SC network model. The hollow arrow is the inhibitory connection between the bimodal neuron
and inter-neuron. The electronic synapses connected with the bimodal neuron follow the rule of
STDP. Since there is only one synapse connected with the inter-neuron, the effect of the synaptic
weight change to its output ﬁring rate is limited, thus its electronic weight value V w is ﬁxed for
simpliﬁcation in the following sections.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 2: VLSI synapses used in this circuit. (a) The inhibitory network. (b) Circuit of excitatory
synapse. (c) Circuit of inhibitory synapse.

decreases the inhibitory synaptic conductance. Thus the inhibitory current which is drawn from the
IF neuron can be modulated by Vpbias and Vdec.
Fig. 3(a) shows circuit schematic of the digital block of Fig. 1(b), a crossbar switch of axon con-
nections between neurons, and it is also where the adaptation occurs. Each switch is a transmission
gate, a parallel combination of an NMOS and a PMOS transistor. These switches are controlled by
signal Vstatus. The value of Vstatus is binary and stored in a register. Each switch status, Vsta-
tus11, Vstatus22, Vstatus12 and Vstatus21, has its own register cell. This design reduces the chip
area of axons compared to that of capacitors for axon state storage used, for example, in [1, 7]. If
the axon circuit expects long time state storage, the capacitor must be expanded in size, lowering
packing density on the chip. Switches in Fig. 3(a) can effectively isolate the output from the input
and conduct the current in either direction. Output spikes from the switch transmission gates in Fig.
3(a) are sent to an OR gate before they arrive at the IF neuron. Vstatus in the register cell updates its
value upon the rising edge of Vact ∧ Vupdate from their calculators which are indicated as ’growth
cone’ and ’axon-growth-factor’ block.
In Fig. 3(a), Vact comes from a spike calculator which estimates growth cone while Vupdate is
generated by a spike calculator which is labelled for Neurotrophin. The circuit of the spike calculator

3

(a)

(b)

Figure 3: Digital axon circuit for single pathway block I. The pathways are labelled as circles
with number 1 and 2. The horizontal labels are input signals and the vertical labels are outputs. (a)
The axon connection circuit. OR gates are used between the transmission gates and the IF neurons
to merge the spike inputs. The switches which are initially switched on are marked by circles. (b) is
the spike calculator for the axon-growth-factor block and growth cone block. It is composed of two
counters and two OR gates. The spikes are either MAC from the inter-neuron or presynaptic spikes
of spike A from the growth cone.

is shown in Fig. 3(b), which is used to estimate whether or not a spike cluster has arrived in the input.
The spike calculator counts the number of spikes and the time interval in a spike train. A spike
calculator is composed of two Toggle ﬂip-ﬂop counters. Its circuit is shown in Fig. 3(b). Counter
1 counts clock pulses ‘clk’, which is from a regular external clock signal. It is used to estimate the
time interval. Each clk adds 1 to counter 1 until it reaches 7. When a new spike comes, counter
1 is reset to 0 while counter 2 counts the number of input spikes. For both counters, the output
becomes high after 7 pulses. Counter 2 will not start counting unless the time interval between two
spikes is small. If the time delay between two spikes is long, counter 1 will simply count the clk
signal continuously. By this way, a spike cluster with spike interval less than a determined value is
identiﬁed.

3 Experiments and Results

Input spike trains for this model are generated by inhomogeneous poisson process. The ﬁring rate
varies with time as spikes clustered by using a periodic cosine function. Since there is rising and
decaying area in cosine function, similar to that described in [16], the density of this spike train
varies with time and is analogous to spike clusters triggered by sensory stimuli. In the following
section 3.2, VLSI circuit and mathematical simulation all share the same inputs for comparison.

3.1 Experiments on SC chip for spike train reregistration

During the initialization of chip test, the reset signal is turned off to initialize the digital block. This
enables the (3-bit) counter 1 to count external clock pulses. When counter 1 reaches its threshold
value, it resets the Toggle ﬂip-ﬂop of both counter 1 and counter 2. Counter 2 sums the input spike
train and generates an update pulse when it reaches its maximum value. For the spike calculator
of the growth cone, if the output of counter 2 is high, the switch status in the crossbar is activated.
As in Fig. 1(b), the input spike trains from the correlated stimuli are in different pathways. The
disparity between these two spike trains and the other spike trains in their own pathway caused the
decrease of synaptic weights which are connected to the bimodal neurons N1. As the neuron N1
ﬁres less spikes, the inhibition towards the neuron N2 is reduced, which results in higher ﬁring rate
of MAC. When the density of MAC gets to a threshold, a new connection is established between

4

Figure 4: The chip test result of the SC model. Snapshot of axon switch bar test. The switch from
ICc-1 to ICx-1, ICc-2 to ICx-1 are on, while the switch in layer 2 is off. Eventually, the synaptic
output from ICx is the summation of input 1 and input 2.

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Figure 5: (a) On chip test of inhibition on IF neuron. (b) Circuit simulation result with constant
current input. Firing rate from circuit varies with Vshunt. (c) Firing rate from the mathematical
model. ζ = V w1 /V w2 (d) Circuit result. Firing rate changes with ζ .

ICx 1 and ICc 2 in digital block of Fig. 1(b). The on chip experiment result is shown in Fig. 4.
After the network updating, the switch 2-1 is turned on while the old pathway 2-2 is turned off. Thus
spike A can reregister with spike V on the right side of Fig. 1(b) again. When the system ﬁnishes
updating, all counters are reset to their initial state, but the new axon connection network is kept by
their register status. The other details such as synaptic weight change can be seen from [4].

3.2 Experiments on Inhibitory Network

The density of MAC spikes which is the key factor triggering the connection update is modulated
by the inhibitory network. We ﬁrstly measured the effect of the strength of the inhibitory synapse,
the value of Vshunt, on the ﬁring rate of N2. Because the main plasticity in this inhibitory network
comes from STDP, here we also investigate the effect of the excitatory synaptic weight V w on
generating MAC spikes.

5

In the circuit, we set the Vpbias above the threshold at 1.833V, which means the inhibition is strong
and at a ﬁxed value. Fig. 5(a) is the on chip test result of inhibition on IF neuron N1 and N2. The
effect of inhibition on neuron N2 is stronger when neuron N1 has higher ﬁring rate. Both neuron N1
and neuron N2 are in the same pathway and receiving the same input spike train, but their synaptic
weights are different: V w1 = 2V , V w2 = 1.2V , thus the neuron N1 has a higher ﬁring rate. The N1
neural membrane voltage reaches its ﬁring threshold earlier than the inter-neuron, so the inter-neuron
is inhibited before its membrane capacitor can accumulate sufﬁcient charge to begin ﬁring.
An obvious factor which inﬂuences the strength of the inhibition is the inhibitory synaptic weight.
Inhibitory synaptic weight is controlled by Vpbias and Vdec in Fig. 2(c). To measure the effect
of Vshunt, constant current source is injected into neuron N2 with the value 1nA, 1.5nA and 2nA
separately. Basically, the output ﬁring rate is a constant number if Vshunt is stable. As shown in
Fig. 5(b), ﬁring rate of N2, FN 2 increases with input current, but decreases with the increasing
Vshunt and the conductance of inhibitory synapse. Even before Vshunt is approaching the threshold
of transistor M3. Isyn is subtracted by the subthreshold current which leaks through M3. The ﬁring
rate of N2, FN 2 is thus reduced. In addition, to measure the effect of inhibitory synaptic weight
on shunt inhibition, increased constant current 1.5nA and 2nA are injected into neuron N1 and N2
membrane capacitor. The ﬁring rate of neuron N2 increases with input current, but still decreases
quickly with the increasing Vshunt which controls the conductance of inhibitory synapse. Even
before Vshunt is approaching the threshold of transistor M3. The curve of ﬁring rate shifts towards
right with increasing current input. fastly We then study the effect of the excitatory synaptic weight
change with the same spike train source to make a comparison between mathematical result in Fig.
5(c) and circuit result in Fig. 5(d). In the mathematical simulation in Fig. 5(c), the output spike
trains of N2 and N1 are made 3 pairs, each of which is labelled with f in, the ﬁring rate of input
spike V they shared. Three inhomogeneous poisson spike trains f in = 1000, 600, 300 are input for
neuron N1 and N2, while the output from N1 is the red ◦ line and the output from N2 is the blue ∗
line. The neuron N2 ﬁring rate varies with ζ , which is the weight ratio V w1/V w2 . V w2 is ﬁxed for
each line. When ζ is near 0, N2 is not inhibited, so FN 2 expresses its maximum value, and FN 2 is
proportional with the ﬁring rate of the input spike train, f in, so that FN 2 doubled to nearly 40 as
f in increased from 300 to 600 per second, and nearly becomes 80 when f in is 1000 per second. As
V w2 increases, neuron N1 starts to ﬁre and the inhibition of N2 becomes effective. FN 2 begins to
decrease as FN 1 starts to increase and reaches the minimum ﬁring rate at the point when ζ is near 2.
If ﬁn is higher, the gradient of the decreasing line is steeper, but FN 2 still becomes 0 around ζ = 2.
Thus the minimum ﬁring rate point near ζ = 2 is independent of the absolute value of ﬁn, which can
be explained by Nyquist-Shannon-Kotelnikov theory. The spike train can be treated as a continuous
signal, and the output of N2 is sampled well by N1 through the inhibitory synapse when FN 1 is two
times of FN 2 .
Fig. 5(d) measured the FN 2 in circuit, which also varies with ζ from 0 to around 2. The synaptic
weight value of excitatory synapse 2 is tested and ﬁxed at 1.5, 1.6 and 1.8V, so there are three data
lines, each one corresponds to a V w2 value. The excitatory synapse 2 works in saturation and the
synaptic weight of excitatory synapse 1 is adjusted between 0 and 3.3V. We can see the neuron
ﬁring rate is basically stable before ζ = 0.7, increasing and proportional to V w2 , similar as the
performance of the mathematical model in Fig. 5(c), but the turning point of the decreasing line
is more obvious. After ζ = 0.7, the four ﬁring rate lines all decrease. In Fig. 5(d), the absolute
gradient or slope value S of the decreasing ﬁring rate between the top and the bottom line is higher
√
than the one in Fig. 5(c). For all V w2 = 1.5V , 1.6V , 1.7, 1.8V , the ﬁring rate curves decrease to
2V . The gradient of each steep line is calculated and labelled
their bottom value at around ζ =
with their initial ﬁring rate FN 2 at the point of ζ = 0 shown as a bar in Fig. 6(a). The comparison
of S of circuit line and mathematical line is paired by selected FN 2 which has the minimum interval
in FN 2 between VLSI circuit and math data. The reason for ﬁring rate lower than 100 are selected
here is the bias caused by the refractory time of LIF neurons. When the ﬁring rate is higher, the bias
is more obvious [12, 19]. Fig. 6(a) shows the gradient value in circuit data is higher than math data
with the nearly same initial FN 2 .
We can explain the longer silent time for neuron N2 in Fig. 5(d) is because V w1 is too small, but
Fig. 6(a) can not be simply explained by inhibitory network model and Nyquist-Shannon-Kotelnikov
theory. The changing ratio of decreasing line slope S is related to other characters of circuit. Hereby
we start from the current equation in transistor.

6

(a)

(b)

Figure 6: (a) Comparison of absolute slope value S with the start ﬁring rate of N2. (b) The upper
bound information rate changes with S and ζ .

For the excitatory synapse in Fig. 2(b), when V w > VT H , and the transistor is in saturation, the
synaptic current equation is

1
2 µnCox ( W
L
where Isyn is the current injected to IF neuron from synapses [20]. µn and Cox are transistor
parameters. The relationship between the current and the membrane voltage of IF neuron can be
expressed as

)(V w − VT H )2

Isyn =

(1)

Csyn

= Isyn

dVsyn
dt
where Vsyn is the membrane voltage and t is inverse to postsynaptic ﬁring rate. So the ratio of
neuron N1 ﬁring rate (FN 1 ) and neuron N2 (FN 2 ) is
(cid:18) V w1
(cid:19)2
V w2

FN 1
FN 2

(2)

≈

(3)

In Fig. 5, the synaptic weight ratio is deﬁned as ζ = V w1/V w2 . Inter-neuron and SC neuron share
√
the same input spike source spike V for all the tests. Simulation results shown in Fig. 5(d) can be
> 2, namely V w1
2, all
explained by Nyquist-Shannon-Kotelnikov sampling theory: if FN 1
>
FN 2
V w2
< 2, namely,
inter-neuron spikes will be inhibited by neuron N1 which has high ﬁring rate; if FN 1
√
FN 2
2, the neuron N2 ﬁring rate FN 2 increases as the excitatory synapse 1 decreases, which is
V w1
<
V w2
consistent with equation 3.
When V w < VT H , then N1 in Fig. 2(b) is switched off and works in subthreshold. The theoretical
(cid:19)
(cid:18) V w
subthreshold current is
εVT
where ε > 1 is a nonideality factor and VT = kT /q , k is Boltzman’s constant, T is temperature in
(cid:18) V w1 − V w2
(cid:19)
Kelvin degrees, q is the charge of an electron [20]. The ratio of ﬁring rates then becomes
εVT

Isyn = Io exp

FN 1
FN 2

= exp

(4)

(5)

7

from which it can be inferred that in subthreshold the inter-neuron ﬁring rate also increases as V w1
decreases. During simulation and chip test, the synaptic output current actually becomes too small
to trigger the IF neuron to ﬁre with required frequency. If the input spike rate is very high, the
inter-neuron can ﬁre postsynaptic spikes, but the window of voltage range for V w1
to modulate the
V w2
postsynaptic spike frequency is narrow, because both V w1 and V w2 are less than VT H . This can be
seen from equations 6,

> 2 =⇒ V w1 > V w2 + εVT ln2

FN 1
FN 2
where εVT ln2 is around 40mV.
3.3 Discussion of changing rate S
Section 3.2 has explained why the circuit result is different from the mathematical result. Then we
discuss the effect of this ﬁring rate difference for the inhibitory network output. Since the input and
the output are all poisson process, the probability of observing a spike in a bin of length ∆t can
be deﬁned as P(spike) = FN 2 × ∆t. Firing rate from N2 is below 100Hz, thus the upper bound
on the possible spike information I is straightforward to calculate in terms of [12, 21] and can be
expressed as

(6)

I = −FN 2 log2 (FN 2 × ∆t)
where FN 2 ∼ −S ζ is for the decreasing line (here we ignore the top and bottom stable parts and
concentrate on the slope). Fig. 6(b) shows the information rate drops down sharply as S and ζ
increases. Then we differentiate the information rate over S and have
dI
dS ∼ ζ log2 (−∆t(S ζ − β ))
(7)
where β is a constant varies with V w . dI /dS shows the amount of information reduction increase
logarithmically as S increases.
Besides the measurement of ﬁring rate, the timing between spikes is another factor affected from
intuitive inference. Thus for information transmission and inhibition in neural network, the inﬂuence
of transistor’s characters over the synaptic current is not trivial. For this network, as the MAC spike
train is the key factor for connection update, the changed S means the network can be updated at a
time point different from the mathematical simulation.

4 Conclusion

This paper introduces a circuit for spike train reregistration as a part of map realignment network,
which is based on the model of visual and auditory integration, a mixed signal VLSI circuit has been
designed with a dynamic excitatory-inhibitory network for the reregistration between the correlated
input spike trains. Disparity between the spike train input can induce the information pathway
adjustment. The on chip test result is consistent with the mathematical simulation and the real-
time experimental result from a robot demonstrator. In this circuit, the inhibitory network plays an
important role in guiding the adaptation of information transmission in different pathways. We used
a very typical circuit for inhibitory synapse and excitatory synapse. Although the on chip result is
basically similar to the SC model simulation result, the transistor characters have inﬂuence on the
ratio of information output and the spike timing in line with the variable synaptic weight.
Comparative performance between the mathematical model and the VLSI circuit has been presented
and analyzed. Simulation results of both mathematical model and the circuit have shown that the
relationship between the neighboring neuron’s activity and the inhibited neuron’s ﬁring rate follows
Nyquist theory, which means there is critical ratio of input synaptic weight between the neighboring
neurons and the inhibited neuron. The MOS circuit shows a higher changing rate of inhibition. This
work can be a reference for larger neuromorphic network design where spike information and timing
issue need to be carefully considered.

8

References
[1] C. Mead, Analog VLSI and Neural Systems. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1989.
[2] J. Lazzaro and J. Wawrzynek, “Low-power silicon neuron, axons and synapses,” University of
California at Berkeley, Tech. Rep., 1993.
[3] A. Boﬁll-I-Petit and A. Murray, “Synchrony detection and ampliﬁcation by silicon neurons
with STDP synapses,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw., vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 1296–1304, Sept. 2004.
[4] J.Huo, M. Reekie, and A. Murray, “Silicon superior colliculus for the integration of visual and
auditory information with adaptive axon connection,” in IEEE International Symposium on
Circuits and Systems, ISCAS.
IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, May
2009, pp. 2157–2160.
[5] S.-C. Liu and R. Douglas, “Temporal coding in a silicon network of integrate-and-ﬁre neurons,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw., vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 1305–1314, Sept. 2004.
[6] A. Bermak and A. Bouzerdoum, “A mixed mode real-time VLSI implementation of a shunting
inhibition cellular neural network,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems
(SiPS 2000), Lafayette, Louisiana, Oct. 2000, pp. 715–723.
[7] B. Taba and K. Boahen, “Silicon growth cones map silicon retina,” in Advances in Neural
Information Processing System, Y. Weiss, B. Sch ¨olkopf, and J. Platt, Eds. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 2006, vol. 18, pp. 1329–1336.
[8] A. Bouzerdoum and R. Pinter, “Shunting inhibitory cellular neural networks: Deviation and
stability analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems-I:Fundamental Theory and Ap-
plications, vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 215–221, 1993.
[9] G. Indiveri, “A current-mode hysteretic winner-take-all network, with excitatory and inhibitory
coupling,” Anaolog Integrated Circuits and Signal Processing, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 279–291,
2001.
[10] G. S. Cymbalyuk, G. N. Patel, R. L. Calabrese, S. P. DeWeerth, and A. H. Cohen, “Modeling
alternation to synchrony with inhibitory coupling: A neuromorphic VLSI approach,” Neural
Computation, vol. 12, no. 10, pp. 2259–2278, Oct. 2000.
[11] V. Pedroni, “Inhibitory mechanism analysis of complexity O(N) MOS winner-take-all net-
works,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Fundamental Theory and Applications,
vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 172–175, Mar. 1995.
[12] L. Abbott and P. Dayan, Theoretical Neuroscience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001.
[13] T. Metzinger, Neural Correlates of Consciousness: Empirical and Conceptual Questions.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, Sep. 2000.
[14] M. Rucci, G. Tononi, and G. M. Edelman, “Registration of neural maps through value-
dependent learning: modeling the alignment of auditory and visual maps in the barn owl’s
optic tectum,” The Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 334–52, Jan. 1997.
[15] E. Knudsen, “Instructed learning in the auditory localization pathway of the barn owl,” Nature,
vol. 417, no. 6886, pp. 322–328, May 2002.
[16] J. Huo and A. Murray, “The adaptation of visual and auditory integration in the barn owl
superior colliculus with Spike Timing Dependent Plasticity,” Neural Networks, vol. 7, no. 22,
pp. 913–21, Sept. 2009.
[17] J. Huo, Z. Yang, and A. Murray, “Bio-inspired real time sensory map realignment in a robotic
barn owl,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Y. Bengio, D. Schuurmans,
J. Laffertty, C. K. I. Williams, and A. Culotta, Eds. MIT Press, 2008, pp. 713–720.
[18] P. Friedel and J. van Hemmen, “Inhibition, not excitation, is the key to multimodal sensory
integration,” Biol. Cybern., vol. 98, pp. 597–618, 2008.
[19] W. Gerstner and W. M. Kistler, Spiking Neuron Models: Single Neurons, Populations, Plastic-
ity. Cambridge University Press, Aug. 2002.
[20] B. Razavi, Design of Analog CMOS Integrated Circuits, international ed. Boston: McGraw-
Hill, 2001.
[21] A. Zador, “Impact of synaptic unreliability on the information transmitted by spiking neurons,”
Journal of Neurophysiology, vol. 79, no. 3, pp. 1219–1229, March 1998.

9

