 

 

N e u r o n a l   S p i k e   G e n e r a t i o n  M e c h a n i sm   a s   a n  
O v e r s am p l i n g ,   N o i s e - s h a p i n g  A - t o - D   C o n v e r t e r    

                                        Dmitri B .  Chklovskii  
   Daniel Soudry  
                            Janelia  Farm Resea rch Campus                Department o f Electrica l Engineering  
                     Howard  Hughes Med ical Institute                               
Technion  
daniel.soudry@gmail.com  
                                    mitya@janelia .hhmi.org                              

Abstract 

We   test  the  hypo thes is  that  the  neuronal  sp ike  generation  mechanism  is  an  
analog- to-d igi tal  (AD)   converter   encod ing   rect ified  
low-pass  fi ltered  
summed   synap tic   current s  into   a   sp ike  train   linearly  decodab le   in  post-
synap tic   neurons .   Fai thful  encod ing  of  an  analog   waveform  by  a  b inary 
signa l  requ ires  tha t  the   sp ike  generation  mechanism   has  a  samp ling  rate  
exceed ing   the   Nyquist  rate   of  the  ana log  s igna l .   Such  over samp ling  is  
consistent wi th  the   experimental observation   tha t  the precision of  the  sp ike -
generation  mechan ism  is  an  order   of  magn itude  greater   than  the  cut -o ff  
frequency  o f   low-pass  fi ltering   in  dendrites .   Add itional  improvement  in   the  
cod ing  accuracy  may  be   achieved   by  no ise-shap ing,   a   technique  used   in  
signa l  process ing .   I f  no ise -shap ing   were   used   in  neurons,   it   wou ld   reduce  
cod ing   error   relative   to   Po isson  sp ike  generator   for   frequenc ies   below 
Nyquis t by  in troducing correlations  into   sp ike  tim es.  By us ing  experimenta l  
data   from  three   d i fferent  c lasse s  of   neurons,   we   demons t rate  tha t  b io log ical 
neurons   uti lize   no ise -shap ing.   Therefore,   the  sp ike-generation  mechan ism  
can be v iewed  as  an over samp ling and  no ise -shap ing AD converter.  

The nature of the neural  spike code remains a centra l problem in neuroscience  [1-3]. In particular, 
no  consensus  exists  on  whether  information  is  encoded  in  firing   rates  [4,  5]  or  individual  spike 
timing  [6,  7].  On  the  single-neuron  level,  evidence  exists  to  support  both  points  of  view.  On  the 
one  hand,  post-synaptic  currents  are  low-pass-filtered  by  dendrites  with  the  cut-off  frequency  of 
approximately  30Hz  [8],  Figure  1B,  providing  ammunition  for  the  firing  rate  camp:  if   the  signal 
reaching  the  soma  is  slowly  varying,  why  would  precise  spike  timing  be  necessary?  On  the  other 
hand, the ability of the spike-generation mechanism to encode harmonics of the injected current up 
to  about  300Hz  [9,  10], Figure  1B,  points  at  its  exquisite  temporal  precision  [11]. Yet,  in view of 
the slow variation of the somatic current, such precision may seem gratuitous and puzzling.  

The  timescale  mismatch  between  gradual  variation  of  the  somatic  current  and  high  precision  of 
spike generation has been addressed previously. Existing explanations often rely on the population 
nature  of  the  neural  code  [10,  12].  Although  this  is  a  distinct  possibility,  the  question  remains 
whether  invoking  population  coding  is  necessary.  Other  possible  explanations  for  the  timescale 
mismatch  include  the  possibility  that  some  synaptic  currents  (for  example,  GABAergic)  may  be 
generated by synapses proximal  to  the  soma and  therefore  not subject  to  low -pass  filtering or  that 
the high frequency harmonics are so strong  in the pre -synaptic spike  that despite attenuation, their 
trace  is  still  present.  Although  in  some  cases,  these  explanations  could  apply,  for  the  majority  of 
synaptic inputs to typical neurons there is a glaring mismatch. 

The  perceived  mismatch  between  the  time  scales  of  somatic  currents  and  the  spike -generation 
mechanism  can  be  resolved  naturally  if  one  views  spike  trains  as  digitally  encoding  analog 
somatic  currents  [13-15],  Figure  1A.  Although  somatic  currents  vary  slowly,  information  that 
could  be  communicated  by  their  analog  amplitude  far  exceeds  that  of  binary  signals,  such  as  all-

or-none  spikes,  of  the  same  sampling  rate.  Therefore,  faithful  digital  encoding  requires  sampling 
rate  of  the  digital  signal  to  be  much  higher  than  the  cut-off  frequency  of  the  analog  signal,  so-
called  over-sampling.  Although  the  spike  generation  mechanism  operates  in  continuous  time,  the 
high  temporal  precision  of  the  spike-
generation mechanism may be viewed as a 
manifestation  of  oversampling,  which  is 
needed  for  the  digital  encoding  of  the 
analog signal. Therefore, the extra order of 
magnitude  in  temporal  precision  available 
to 
the 
spike-generation  mechanism 
relative  to  somatic  current,  Figure  1B,  is 
the 
faithfully 
necessary 
to 
encode 
amplitude  of 
the  analog  signal, 
thus 
potentially  reconciling  the  firing  rate  and 
the spike timing points of view [13-15]. 

Figure  1.  Hybrid  digital-analog  operation  of  neuronal  circuits.  A.  Post-synaptic  currents  are 
low-pass filtered and summed  in dendrites (black) to produce a somatic current (blue). This analog 
signal  is  converted  by  the  spike  generation  mechanism  into  a  sequence  of  all -or-none  spikes 
(green),  a  digital  signal.  Spikes  propagate  along  an  axon  and  are  chemically  transduced  across 
synapses  (gray)  into  post-synatpic  currents  (black),  whose  amplitude  reflects  synaptic  weights, 
thus  converting  digital  signal  back  to  analog. B.  Frequency  response  function  for  dendrites  (blue, 
adapted  from  [8])  and  for  the  spike  generation  mechanism  (green,  adapted  from  [9]).  Note  one 
order  of  magnitude  gap  between  the  cut  off  frequencies.  C.  Amplitude  of  the  summed  post-
synaptic  currents  depends  strongly  on  spike  timing.  If  the  blue  spike  arrives  just  5ms  later,  as 
shown  in  red,  the  EPSCs  sum  to  a  value  already  20%  less.  Therefore,  the  extra  precision  of  the 
digital signal may be used to communicate the amplitude of the analog signal.  

In  signal processing, efficient AD conversion combines  the  principle of oversampling with  that of 
noise-shaping, which  utilizes  correlations  in  the  digital  signal  to  allow more  accurate  encoding  of 
the  analog  amplitude.  This  is  exemplified  by  a  family  of  AD  converters  called  modulators 
[16], of which the basic one is analogous to an integrate-and-fire (IF) neuron [13-15]. The analogy 
between  the  basic  modulator  and  the  IF  neuron  led  to  the  suggestion  that  neurons  also  use 
noise-shaping  to  encode  incoming  analog  current  waveform  in  the  digital   spike  train  [13].  
However,  the hypothesis of noise-shaping AD conversion has never been  tested  experimentally  in 
biological neurons.   

In this paper, by analyzing existing experimental datasets, we demonstrate that noise-shaping is 
present in three different classes of neurons from vertebrates and invertebrates. This lends support 
to the view that neurons act as oversampling and noise-shaping AD converters and accounts for 
the mismatch between the slowly varying somatic currents and precise spike timing. Moreover, we 
show that the degree of noise-shaping in biological neurons exceeds that used by basic  
modulators or IF neurons and propose viewing more complicated models in the noise -shaping 
framework. This paper is organized as follows: We review the principles of oversampling and 
noise-shaping in Section 2. In Section 3, we present experimental evidence for noise-shaping AD 
conversion in neurons. In Section 4 we argue that rectification of somatic currents may  improve 
energy efficiency and/or implement de-noising.  

2 .     Oversampling and noise-shaping in AD converters 

To  understand  how  oversampling  can  lead  to  more  accurate  encoding  of  the  analog  signal 
amplitude  in  a  digital  form,  we  first  consider  a  Poisson  spike  encoder,  whose  rate  of  spiking  is 
modulated by  the  signal amplitude, Figure 2A.  Such an AD  converter samples an analog  signal at 
discrete  time  points  and  generates  a  spike  with  a  probability  given  by  the  (normalized)  signal 
amplitude. Because of the binary nature of spike trains, the resulting spike train encodes the signal 
with a large error even when the sampling is done at Nyquist rate, i.e. the lowest rate for alias-free 
sampling.  

To  reduce  the  encoding  error  a  Poisson  encoder  can  sample  at  frequencies,  fs  ,  higher  than 
Nyquist,  fN  –  hence,  the  term  oversampling,  Figure  2B.  When  combined  with  decoding  by  low-
pass  filtering  (down  to Nyquist)  on  the  receiving  end,  this  leads  to  a  reduction of  the  error, which 
can be estimated as follows. The number of samples over a Nyquist half-period (1/2fN) is given by 
the oversampling ratio: 

. 

  

  
  
As  the  normalized  signal  amplitude, 
          ,  stays  roughly  constant  over 
the  Nyquist  half-period, 
it  can  be 
encoded  by  spikes  generated  with  a 
fixed  probability,  x.  For  a  Poisson 
process  the  variance  in  the  number  of 
spikes  is  equal  to  the  mean,       
                   .  Therefore, 
the 
mean  relative  error  of 
the  signal 
decoded  by  averaging  over  the  Nyquist 
half-period: 

                           ,         (1) 

indicating  that  oversampling  reduces 
transmission  error.  However,  the  weak 
dependence  of 
the  error  on 
the 
oversampling 
indicates 
frequency 
diminishing  returns  on  the  investment 
in  oversampling  and  motivates  one  to 
search for other ways to lower the error. 

Figure 2. Oversampling and noise-shaping in AD conversion. A. Analog somatic current (blue) 
and  its  digital  code  (green).  The  difference  between  the  green  and  the  blue  curves  is  encoding 
error.  B.  Digital  output  of  oversampling  Poisson  encoder  over  one  Nyquist  half-period.  C.  Error 
power  spectrum  of  a  Nyquist  (dark  green)  and  oversampled  (light  green)  Poisson  encoder. 
Although  the  total  error  power  is  the  same,  the  fraction  surviving  low-pass  filtering  during 
decoding  (solid  green)  is  smaller  in  oversampled  case.  D.  Basic    modulator.  E.  Signal  at  the 
output  of  the  integrator.  F. Digital  output  of  the   modulator  over  one Nyquist  period.  G.  Error 
power spectrum of the  modulator (brown) is shifted to higher frequencies and low-pass filtered 
during decoding. The remaining error power (solid brown) is smaller than for Poisson encoder.   

To  reduce  encoding  error  beyond  the  ½  power  of  the  oversampling  ratio,  the  principle  of  noise-
shaping was put forward [17]. To illustrate noise-shaping consider a basic AD converter called  
[18],  Figure  2D.  In  the  basic    modulator,  the  previous  quantized  signal  is  fed  back  and 
subtracted  from  the  incoming  signal  and  then  the  difference  is  integrated  in  time.  Rather  than 
quantizing  the  input  signal, as would be done  in  the Poisson  encoder,  modulator quantizes  the 
integral  of  the  difference  between  the  incoming  analog  signal  and  the  previous  quantized  signal , 
Figure  2F.  One  can  see  that,  in  the  oversampling  regime,  the  quantization  error  of  the  basic   
modulator  is  significantly  less  than  that  of  the  Poisson  encoder. As  the  variance  in  the  number  of 
spikes  over  the  Nyquist  period  is  less  than  one,  the  mean  relative  error  of  the  signal   is  at  most, 
         , which is better than the Poisson encoder. 

To  gain  additional  insight  and  understand  the  origin  of  the  term  noise-shaping,  we  repeat  the 
above  analysis  in  the  Fourier  domain.  First,  the  Poisson  encoder  has  a  flat  power  spectrum  up  to 
the  sampling  frequency,  Figure  2C. Oversampling  preserves  the  total  error  power  but  extends  the 
frequency  range  resulting  in  the  lower  error  power  below  Nyquist.  Second,  a  more  detailed 
analysis of the basic  modulator, where the dynamics is linearized by replacing the quantization 
device  with  a  random  noise  injection  [19],  shows  that  the  quantization  noise  is  effectively 
differentiated. Taking the derivative in time is equivalent to multiplying the power spectrum of the 

quantization  noise  by  frequency  squared.  Such  reduction  of  noise  power  at  low  frequencies  is  an 
example  of  noise  shaping,  Figure  2G.  Under  the  additional  assumption  of  the  white  quantization 
noise, such analysis yields: 

            ,   

 

 

 

(2) 

which for R >> 1 is significantly better performance than for the Poisson encoder, Eq.(1).  

As  mentioned  previously,  the  basic    modulator,  Figure  2D,  in  the  continuous-time  regime  is 
nothing other than an IF neuron [13, 20, 21]. In the IF neuron, quantization  is implemented by the 
spike  generation  mechanism  and  the  negative  feedback  corresponds  to  the  after -spike  reset.  Note 
that  resetting  the  integrator  to  zero  is  strictly  equivalent  to  subtraction  only  for  continuous-time 
operation.  In  discrete-time  computer  simulations,  the  integrator  value  may  exceed  the  threshold, 
and,  therefore,  subtraction  of  the  threshold  value  rather  than  reset  must  be  used.  Next,  motivated 
by the -IF analogy, we look for the signs of noise-shaping AD conversion in real neurons. 

3 .    Experimental evidence of noise-shaping AD conversion in real neurons 

In order  to determine whether noise-shaping AD conversion  takes place  in biological  neurons, we 
analyzed  three  experimental  datasets,  where  spike  trains  were  generated  by  time-varying  somatic 
currents:  1)  rat  somatosensory  cortex  L5  pyramidal  neurons  [9],  2)  mouse  olfactory  mitral  cells 
[22,  23],  and  3)  fruit  fly olfactory  receptor neurons  [24].  In  the  first  two datasets,  the  current was 
injected  through  an  electrode  in  whole-cell  patch  clamp  mode,  while  in  the  third,  the  recording 
was  extracellular  and  the  intrinsic  somatic  current  could  be  measured  because  the  glial 
compartment included only one active neuron.  

Testing  the  noise-shaping  AD  conversion  hypothesis  is  complicated  by  the  fact  that  encoded  and 
decoded  signals  are  hard  to measure  accurately. First,  as  somatic  current  is  rectified by  the  spike -
generation  mechanism,  only  its  super-threshold  component  can  be  encoded  faithfully  making  it 
hard to know exactly what is being encoded. Second, decoding in the dendrites is not accessible in 
these single-neuron recordings. 

In  view  of  these  difficulties,  we  start  by  simply  computing  the  power  spectrum  of  the 
reconstruction  error  obtained  by  subtracting  a  scaled  and  shifted,  but  otherwise  unaltered,  spike 
train  from  the  somatic  current.  The  scaling  factor  was  determined  by  the  total  weight  of  the 
decoding linear filter and the shift was optimized to maximize information capacity, see below. At 
the  frequencies  below  20Hz  the  error  contains  significantly  lower  power   than  the  input  signal, 
Figure  3,  indicating  that  the  spike  generation  mechanism  may  be  viewed  as  an  AD  converter. 
Furthermore,  the  error  power  spectrum  of  the  biological  neuron  is  below  that  of  the  Poisson 
encoder,  thus  indicating  the  presence of  noise-shaping.  For  dataset 3 we  also plot  the  error power 
spectrum of the IF neuron,  the threshold of which is chosen to generate the same number of spikes 
as the biological neuron. 

Figure  3.  Evidence  of  noise-shaping.  Power  spectra  of  the  somatic  current  (blue),  difference 
between  the  somatic  current  and  the  digital  spike  train  of  the  biological  neuron  (black),    of  the 
Poisson encoder (green) and of the IF neuron (red). Left: datset 1, right: dataset 3.  

 

0102030405060708090102103104Frequency [Hz]Spectral power, a.u.  010203040506070809010010-410-310-210-1100101Frequency [Hz]Spectral power, a.u.  somatic currentbiological neuron errorPoisson encoder errorI&F neuron errorAlthough  the  simple  analysis  presented  above  indicates  noise-shaping,  subtracting  the  spike  train 
from  the  input  signal,  Figure  3,  does  not  accurately  quantify  the  error   when  decoding  involves 
additional  filtering. An example of such additional encoding/decoding  is predictive coding, which 
will  be  discussed  below  [25].  To  take  such  decoding  filter  into  account,  we  computed  a  decoded 
waveform  by  convolving  the  spike  train  with  the  optimal  linear  filter,  which  predicts  the  somatic 
current from the spike train with the least mean squared error.  

Our  linear  decoding  analysis  lends  additional  support  to  the  noise-shaping  AD  conversion 
hypothesis [13-15]. First, the optimal linear filter shape is similar to unitary post -synaptic currents, 
Figure  4B,  thus  supporting  the  view  that  dendrites  reconstruct  the  somatic  current  of  the  pre-
synaptic  neuron  by  low-pass  filtering  the  spike  train  in  accordance  with  the  noise-shaping 
principle  [13]. Second, we  found  that  linear decoding using an optimal  filter accounts  for 60 -80% 
of  the  somatic  current  variance.  Naturally,  such  prediction  works  better  for  neurons  in  supra -
threshold  regime,  i.e.  with  high  firing  rates,  an  issue  to  which  we  return  in  Section  4.   To  avoid 
complications  associated  with  rectification  for  now  we  focused  on  neurons  which  were  in  supra -
threshold  regime by monitoring  that  the  relationship between predicted and actual current  is close 
to linear.  

C 

D 

 

 
Figure  4.  Linear  decoding  of  experimentally  recorded  spike  trains.   A. Waveform  of  somatic 
current  (blue),  resulting  spike  train  (black),  and  the  linearly  decoded waveform  (red)  from dataset 
1.  B.  Top:  Optimal  linear  filter  for  the  trace  in  A,  is  representative  of  other  datasets  as  well. 
Bottom:  Typical  EPSPs  have  a  shape  similar  to  the  decoding  filter  (adapted  from  [26]).  C-D. 
Power  spectra  of  the  somatic  current  (blue),  the  decdoding  error  of  the  biological  neuron  (black), 
the Poisson encoder (green), and IF neuron (red) for dataset 1 (C) dataset 3 (D).  
 
Next, we analyzed the spectral distribution of the reconstruction error calculated by subtracting the 
decoded  spike  train,  i.e.  convolved  with  the  computed  optimal  linear  filter,  from  the  somatic 
current. We  found  that  at  low  frequencies  the  error  power  is  significantly  lower  tha n  in  the  input 
signal,  Figure  4C,D.  This  observation  confirms  that  signals  below  the  dendritic  cut -off  frequency 
of 20-30Hz can be efficiently communicated using spike trains.   

To quantify the effect of noise-shaping we computed information capacity of different encoders: 

0102030405060708090102103Frequency [Hz]Spectral power, a.u.  010203040506070809010010-410-310-210-1100101102Frequency [Hz]Spectral power, a.u.  somatic currentbiological neuron errorPoisson encoder errorI&F neuron error           

 

    
    

 

  

where  S(f)  and  N(f)  are  the  power  spectra  of  the  somatic  current  and  encoding  error 
correspondingly  and  the  sum  is  computed  only  over  the  frequencies  for  which  S(f)  >  N(f). 
Because  the  plots  in  Figure  4C,D  use  semi-logrithmic  scale,  the  information  capacity  can  be 
estimated  from  the  area  between  a  somatic  current  (blue)  power  spectrum  and  an  error  power 
spectrum. We find that the biological spike generation mechanism has higher information capacity 
than  the  Poisson  encoder  and  IF  neurons.  Therefore,  neurons  act  as  AD  converters  with  stronger 
noise-shaping than IF neurons.  

We now return to the predictive nature of the spike generation mechanism. Given the causal nature 
of  the  spike  generation  mechanism  it  is  surprising  that  the  optimal  filters  for  all  three  datasets 
carry  most  of  their  weight  following  a  spike,  Figure  4B.  This  indicates  that  the  spike  generation 
mechanism  is  capable  of  making  predictions,  which  are  possible  in  these  experiments  because 
somatic  currents  are  temporally  correlated.  We  note  that  these  observations  make  de lay-free 
reconstruction of the signal possible, thus allowing fast operation of neural circuits  [27].  

The predictive nature of the encoder can be captured by a  modulator embedded in a predictive 
coding  feedback  loop  [28],  Figure  5A. We  verified  by  simulation  that  such  a  nested  architecture 
generates  a  similar  optimal  linear  filter  with  most  of  its  weight  in  the  time  following  a  spike, 
Figure  5A  right.  Of  course  such 
prediction 
is  only  possible 
for 
correlated  inputs  implying  that  the 
shape  of  the  optimal  linear  filter 
depends  on  the  statistics  of  the 
inputs. The  role  of predictive  coding 
is to reduce the dynamic range of the 
signal  that  enters  ,  thus  avoiding 
overloading.  A  possible  biological 
implementation  for  such  integrating 
Ca2+ 
feedback 
could 
be 
concentration  and  Ca2+  dependent 
potassium channels [25, 29].  

Figure 5. Enhanced  modulators.   A.  modulator combined with   predictive coder.  In such 
device, the optimal decoding filter computed for correlated inputs has most of its weight following 
a  spike,  similar  to  experimental  measurements,  Figure  4B.  B.  Second-order      modulator 
possesses  stronger  noise-shaping  properties.  Because  such  circuit  contains  an  internal  state 
variable it generates a non-periodic spike train in response to a constant input. Bottom trace shows 
a typical result of a simulation. Black – spikes, blue – input current. 

4 .   Possible reasons for current rectification: energy efficiency and de-noising 

We  have  shown  that  at  high  firing  rates  biological  neurons  encode  somatic  current  into  a  linearly 
decodable spike  train. However, at low  firing rates  linear decoding cannot faithfully reproduce the 
somatic  current  because  of  rectification  in  the  spike  generation  mechanism.  If  the  objective  of 
spike  generation  is  faithful  AD  conversion,  why  would  such  rectifica tion  exist?  We  see  two 
potential reasons: energy efficiency and de-noising.  

It is widely believed that minimizing metabolic costs is an important consideration in b rain design 
and  operation  [30,  31].  Moreover,  spikes  are  known  to  consume  a  significant  fraction  of  the 
metabolic  budget  [30,  32]  placing  a  premium  on  their  total  number.  Thus,  we  can  postulate  that 
neuronal  spike  trains  find  a  trade-off  between  the  mean  squared  error  in  the  decoded  spike  train 
relative  to  the  input  signal  and  the  total  number  of  spikes,  as  expressed  by  the  following  cost 
function over a time interval T: 

 
       

           

   
     

            
             

     

   
     

    

, 

         (3) 

where x is the analog input signal, s is the binary spike sequence composed of zeros and ones, and 
   is the linear filter.  

 

 

   

To  demonstrate  how  solving  Eq.(3)  would  lead  to  thresholding,  let  us  consider  a  simplified 
version taken over a Nyquist period, during which the input signal stays constant:  
                                       
where       and       normalized  by  w. Minimizing  such  a  cost  function  reduces  to  choosing  the  lowest 
lying  parabola  for  a  given       ,  Figure  6A.  Therefore,  thresholding  is  a  natural  outcome  of 
minimizing a cost function combining the decoding error and the energy cost, Eq.(3). 

                

  (4) 

In  addition  to  energy  efficiency,  there  may  be  a  computational  reason  for  thresholding  somatic 
current  in neurons. To  illustrate  this point, we note  that  the  cost  function  in Eq.  (3)  for continuous 
variables,  st,  may  be  viewed  as  a  non-negative  version  of  the  L1-norm  regularized  linear 
regression  called  LASSO  [33],  which  is  commonly  used  for  de-noising  of  sparse  and  Laplacian 
signals [34]. Such cost  function can be minimized by iteratively applying a gradient descent and a 
shrinkage  steps  [35],  which  is  equivalent  to  thresholding  (one-sided  in  case  of  non-negative 
variables), Figure 6B,C. Therefore, neurons may be encoding a de-noised input signal.   

 
Figure  6.  Possible  reasons  for  rectification  in  neurons.  A.  Cost  function  combining  encoding 
error squared with metabolic expense vs. input signal     for different values of the spike number N, 
Eq.(4). Note  that  the  optimal  number  of  spikes  jumps  from  zero  to  one  as  a  function  of  input.  B. 
Estimating  most  probable  “clean”  signal  value  for  continuous  non-negative  Laplacian  signal  and 
Gaussian  noise,  Eq.(3)  (while  setting  w  =  1).  The  parabolas  (red)  illustrate  the  quadratic  log-
likelihood  term  in  (3)  for  different  values  of  the  measurement,  s,  while  the  linear  function  (blue) 
reflects  the  linear  log-prior  term  in  (3). C. The minimum of  the  combined  cost  function  in B  is  at 
zero if s , and grows linearly with s, if s >. 

5 .     D i s c u s s i o n   

In this paper, we demonstrated that  the neuronal spike-generation mechanism can be viewed as an 
oversampling  and  noise-shaping  AD  converter,  which  encodes  a  rectified  low-pass  filtered 
somatic  current  as  a  digital  spike  train.  Rectification  by  the  spike  generation  mechanism  may 
subserve  both  energy  efficiency  and  de-noising.  As  the  degree  of  noise-shaping  in  biological 
neurons  exceeds  that  in  IF  neurons,  or  basic  ,  we  suggest  that  neurons  should  be  modeled  by 
more advanced   modulators, e.g. Figure 5B. Interestingly,  modulators can be also viewed as 
coders with error prediction feedback [19].  

Many  publications  studied  various  aspects  of  spike  generation  in  neurons  yet  we  believe  that  the 
framework  [13-15]  we  adopt  is  different  and  discuss  its  relationship  to  some  of  the  studies.  Our 
framework  is  different  from  previous  proposals  to  cast  neurons  as  predictors  [36,  37]  because  a 
different  quantity  is  being  predicted.  The  possibility  of  perfect  decoding  from  a  spike  train  with 
infinite  temporal precision has been proven  in  [38]. Here, we are concerned with  a more practical 
issue  of  how  reconstruction  error  scales  with  the  over -sampling  ratio.  Also,  we  consider  linear 
decoding  which  sets  our  work  apart  from  [39].  Finally,  previous  experiments  addressing  noise-
shaping [40] studied the power spectrum of the spike train rather than that of the encoding error. 

Our  work  is  aimed  at  understanding  biological  and  computational  principles  of  spike -generation 
and decoding  and  is  not meant  as  a  substitute  for  the  existing  phenomenological  spike-generation 
models  [41],  which  allow  efficient  fitting  of  parameters  and  prediction  of  spike  trains  [42].  Yet, 
the  theoretical  framework  [13-15]  we  adopt  may  assist  in  building  better  models  of  spike 
generation for a given somatic current waveform. First, having interpreted spike generation as AD 
conversion,  we  can  draw  on  the  rich  experience  in  signal  processing  to  attack  the  problem. 
Second,  this  framework  suggests  a  natural  metric  to  compare  the  performance  of  different  spike 
generation  models  in  the  high  firing  rate  regime:  a  mean  squared  error  between  the  injected 

current waveform and the filtered version of the spike train produced by a model provided the total 
number  of  spikes  is  the  same  as  in  the  experimental  data.  The  AD  conversion  framework  adds 
justification  to  the  previously  proposed  spike  distance  obtained  by  subtracting  low-pass  filtered 
spike trains [43]. 

As  the  framework  [13-15]  we  adopt  relies  on  viewing  neuronal  computation  as  an  analog-digital 
hybrid, which requires AD and DA conversion at every step , one may wonder about the reason for 
such  a  hybrid  scheme. Starting with  the  early days of  computers,  the  analog mode  is  known  to be 
advantageous  for computation. For example, performing addition of many variables  in one  s tep  is 
possible in the analog mode simply by Kirchhoff law, but would require hu ndreds of logical gates 
in  the  digital  mode    [44].  However,  the  analog  mode  is  vulnerable  to  noise  build -up  over  many 
stages of  computation  and  is  inferior  in precisely  communicating  information over  long distances 
under limited energy budget [30, 31]. While early analog computers were displaced by their digital 
counterparts, evolution combined analog and digital modes  into a computational  hybrid  [44],  thus 
necessitating efficient AD and DA conversion, which was the focus of the present study.  

We  are  grateful  to  L.  Abbott,  S.  Druckmann,  D.  Golomb,  T.  Hu,  J.  Magee,  N.  Spruston,  B. 
Theilman for helpful discussions and comments on the manuscript, to X.-J. Wang, D. McCormick, 
K.  Nagel,  R. Wilson,  K.  Padmanabhan ,   N.  Urban,  S.  Tripathy,  H.  Koendgen,  and  M.  Giugliano  
for  sharing  their  data.  The  work  of  D.S.  was  partially  supported  by  the  Intel  Collaborative 
Research Institute for Computational Intelligence (ICRI -CI). 

8 .  

9 .  

3 .  

4 .  

6 .  

7 .  

R e f e r e n c e s  
Ferster,  D.  and  N.  Spruston,   Cracking  the neura l code.  Science,  1995 .  270 : p .  756 -7 .  
1 .  
Panzeri,   S. ,   et  al. ,   Sensory  neura l  codes  using   mu ltip lexed   tempora l  sca les.   Trends 
2 .  
Neurosc i,  2010 .  33(3): p .  111 -20 .  
Stevens,   C.F.   and   A.   Zador,   Neura l  cod ing:   The  en igma   o f  the  bra in .   Curr   B io l,  
1995 .  5(12): p .  1370 -1 . 
Shad len,   M .N.   and   W.T.   Newsome,   The  variab le  d ischarge  o f  cortica l   neurons:  
imp lica tions  for  connectivi ty,   compu ta tion ,   and   in forma tion   cod ing .   J   Neurosci,  
1998 .  18(10): p .  3870 -96 .  
Shad len,   M .N.   and   W.T.   Newsome,   No ise,   neura l  codes   and   cortica l  organ iza tion .  
Curr  Op in Neurob io l,  1994 .  4(4): p .  569 -79 . 
Singer,   W.   and   C.M .   Gray,   Visua l  fea ture   in tegra tion   and   the  tempora l  co rrela t ion  
hypo thesis.  Annu Rev Neurosci,  1995 .   18 : p .  555 -86 . 
Meister,   M . ,   Mu ltineurona l  codes  in   ret ina l  signa ling .   Proc  Natl  Acad   Sci  U  S  A,  
1996 .  93(2): p .  609 -14 . 
Cook,   E .P. ,   et  al. ,   Dendri te- to-soma   inpu t/ou tpu t  function   o f  con tinuous  time -
varying   signa ls  in   h ippocampa l  CA1   pyramida l  neurons.   J  Neurophysio l,   2 007 .  
98(5): p .  2943 -55 . 
Kondgen,   H. ,   et  al. ,   The   dynamica l  response  properties  o f  neocortica l  neurons   to  
tempora lly  modu la ted  no isy  inpu ts in  vitro .  Cereb  Cortex ,  2008 .  18(9): p.  2086 -97 .  
Tchumatchenko ,   T. ,   et  al. ,   Ultra fa st  popu la tion   encod ing   by  c ortica l  neurons.   J  
Neurosc i,  2011 .  31(34): p .  12171 -9 .  
Mainen,   Z.F.   and   T.J .   Sejnowsk i,   Reliab ili ty  o f  sp ike  timing   in   neocortica l  neurons.  
Science ,  1995 .  268(5216): p . 1503 -6 . 
Mar,   D.J . ,   et  al. ,   No ise   shap ing   in   popu la tions  o f  coup led   model  neuron s.   Proc  Natl 
Acad  Sci U S  A,  1999 .   96(18): p .  10450 -5 .  
Shin,   J . ,   Adap tive  no ise   shap ing   neura l  sp ike  encod ing   and   decod ing.  
Neurocomputing,  2001 .   38-40 : p .  369 -381 . 
Shin,   J . ,   The   no ise   shap ing   neura l  cod ing   hypo thesis:   a   brief  h is tory  and  
physio log ica l imp lica tions.  Neurocomputing,  2002 .   44 : p .  167 -175 . 
Shin,   J .H. ,   Adap ta tion   in   sp iking   neurons  based   on   the  no ise  shap ing   neura l  cod ing 
hypo thesis.  Neural Networks ,  2001 .  14(6-7): p .  907 -919 . 
Schreier,   R.   and   G.C.   Temes,   Understand ing   delta -sigma   da ta   converters2005 ,  
P iscataway,  NJ : IEEE  Press,  Wiley.  x ii,  446  p .  
Candy,   J .C. ,   A  use  o f  limit  cycle  oscilla tions  to   ob ta in   robust  ana log - to-d ig ita l 
converters.  IEEE  Trans.  Commun,  1974 .  COM -22 : p .  298 -305 .  

10 . 

12 . 

14 . 

15 . 

16 . 

17 . 

5 .  

11 . 

13 . 

Inose,   H. ,  Y.  Yasuda,   and   J .  Murakami ,   A  telemetr ing   system  code  modu la tion   -  
modu la tion .  IRE  Trans.  Space Elect.  Teleme try,  1962 .   SET-8 : p .  204 -209 .  
Spang,  H.A.  and  P.M .  Schultheiss,   Reduction  o f quan tizing  no ise by use o f  feedback.  
IRE  TRans.  Commun.  Sys. ,  1962 : p .  373 -380 . 
Hovin,  M . ,   et  a l. ,   Delta -S igma   modu la tion   in   sing le  neurons ,   in  IEEE   In terna tiona l 
Symposium on  Circu its and  Systems 2002 .  
Cheung,   K.F.   and   P.Y.H.   Tang,   S igma -Delta   Modu la tion   Neura l  Networks.   Proc. 
IEEE  Int Conf Neural Networkds,  1993 : p .  489 -493 . 
Padmanabhan,  K.  and  N.  Urban,   In trins ic b iophysica l d iversi ty decorela tes neurona l 
firing  wh i le  increas ing  in forma tion  con ten t.  Nat Neurosc i,  2010 .   13 : p .  1276 -82 . 
Urban,  N.   and  S.  Tripathy,   Neurosc ience:  Circu its drive   cell d iversi ty.  Nature,  2012 .  
488(7411): p .  289 -90 . 
Nagel,  K.I .  and  R.I .  Wilson,   persona l commun ica tion .  
Shin,   J . ,   C.   Koch,   and   R.   Douglas,   Adap tive  neura l  cod ing   dependen t  on   the  time -
varying  sta tistics o f the soma tic inpu t curren t.  Neural Comp ,  1999 .  11 : p .  1893 -913 . 
Magee ,   J .C.   and   E .P.   Cook ,   Soma tic  EPSP  amp litude   is  independen t  o f  synapse 
loca tion  in  h ippocampa l pyramida l neurons.  Nat Neurosci,  2000 .   3(9): p .  895 -903 . 
Thorpe ,   S. ,  D.   Fize,   and  C.  Marlo t,   Speed   o f processing   in   the  human  visua l  system.  
Nature ,  1996 .  381(6582): p .  520 -2 .  
Tewksbury,   S.K.   and   R.W.   Hallock,   Oversamp le,   linear  pred ictive  and   no ise -
shap ing  coders o f order N>1 .  IEEE  Trans Circuits & Sys,  1978 .  CAS25 : p .  436 -47 . 
Wang,   X.J . ,   et  al. ,   Adap ta tion   and   tempora l  decorrela tion   by  sing le  neurons  in   the 
primary visua l cortex.  J  Neurophys io l,  2003 .   89(6): p .  3279 -93 .  
Attwel l,   D.   and   S.B .   Laugh l in,   An   energy  budget  for  signa ling   in   the  grey  ma tter  o f 
the bra in .  J  Cereb  B lood  Flow Me tab ,  2001 .   21(10): p .  1133 -45 .  
Laugh lin,   S.B .   and   T.J .   Sejnowski,   Commun ica tion   in   neurona l  networks.   Science,  
2003 .  301 (5641): p .  1870 -4 . 
Lennie,  P. ,  The  cost o f cortica l compu ta tion .  Curr  B io l,  2003 .  13(6): p .  493 -7 .  
Tibshirani,   R. ,   Regress ion   shrinkage  and   selection   via  the  Lasso .   Journal  of  the  
Royal Stat ist ical Socie ty Ser ies B -Methodo logical,  1996 .   58(1): p .  267 -288 . 
Chen,   S.S.B . ,   D.L.   Donoho ,   and   M .A.   Saunders,   Atom ic  decomposition   by  basis  
pursu it.  Siam Journal on Scienti fic Comput ing,  1998 .   20(1): p .  33 -61 . 
Elad ,  M . ,   et  al. ,   Wide-ang le  view a t  i tera ted   sh rinkage a lgorithms.  P SOc Pho to -Op t  
Ins,  2007 .  6701 : p .  70102 .  
Deneve ,  S. ,  Bayes ian  sp iking  neurons I:  in ference.  Neural Comp ,  2008 .  20 : p .  91 . 
Yu,  A.J . ,   Op tima l  Change -Detection   and   Sp inking   Neurons ,   in  NIPS ,   B .   Scho lkopf,  
J .  P latt,  and  T.  Hofmann,  Ed itors.  2006 .  
Lazar,   A.   and   L.   To th,   Perfect  Recovery  and   Sensitivity  Ana lysis  o f  Time  Encoded  
Band limited   S igna ls.   IEEE   TRANSACT IONS   ON  CIRCUITS  AND   SYSTEMS,  
2004 .  51(10). 
Pfister,   J .P. ,   P.  Dayan,   and   M .   Lengyel,   Synapses  w i th   short - term  p last icity  are  
op tima l est ima tors o f p resynap tic membrane po ten tia ls.  Nat Neurosci,  2010 .   13(10): 
p .  1271 -5 . 
Chacron,   M .J . ,   et  al. ,   Experimen ta l  and   theoretica l  demonstra tion   o f  no ise  shap ing  
by 
in tersp ike  
in terva l  correla tion s.   Fluc tua t ions  and   No ise 
in  B io logica l,  
B iophys ical,  and  B iomed ical  Systems III ,  2005 .   5841 : p .  150 -163 . 
P illow,   J . ,   Likelihood -based   approaches  to   modeling   the  neura l  code ,   in  Bayesian  
Bra in:   Probab ilist ic  Approaches  to   Neura l  Cod ing ,   K.   Doya,   et   al. ,   Ed itors.   2007 , 
MIT Press.  
Jo livet,   R. ,   et  al. ,   A  benchmark  tes t  for  a   quan tita tive  a ssessmen t   o f  simp le  neuron  
models.  J  Neurosci Methods,  2008 .   169 (2): p .  417 -24 .  
van Rossum,  M .C. ,  A novel sp ike d istance.  Neural Comput,  2001 .   13(4): p.  751 -63 . 
Sarpeshkar,   R. ,   Ana log   versus  d ig ita l:   extrapo la t ing  
from  electron ics 
to  
neurob io logy.  Neural Computat ion,  1998 .   10(7): p.  1601-38 .  

18 . 

19 . 

20 . 

21 . 

22 . 

23 . 

24 . 
25 . 

26 . 

27 . 

28 . 

29 . 

30 . 

31 . 

32 . 
33 . 

34 . 

35 . 

36 . 
37 . 

38 . 

39 . 

40 . 

41 . 

42 . 

43 . 
44 . 

 

