 

 
 

L e a r n i n g   B r a i n   C o n n e c t i v i t y   o f  A l z h e im e r ' s  
D i s e a s e   f r om   N e u r o im a g i n g   D a t a  

Shua i Huang 1,  J ing  L i 1,  Liang  Sun 2 ,3,  Jun Liu2 ,3,  Tere sa  Wu1,  Kewei Chen4,    
Adam Fleisher 4,  Er ic Reiman 4,  J ieping  Ye 2 ,3  
1Industrial Engineering,  2Compu ter  Science and  Enginee ring,   and  3Center  for  Evo lu tionary 
Functional Genomics,  The  B iodesign Inst itute,  Arizona S tate University,  Tempe,  USA  
{shuang31 ,  j ing.l i.8 ,  sun.l iang,  j .liu, teresa.wu,  j iep ing.ye}@asu.edu  
 4Banner  Alzheimer ’s Insti tu te and  Banner  PET Center,  Banner  Good  Samari tan Med ical 
Cen ter,  Phoenix,  USA  
{kewei.chen , adam.fleisher, eric.reiman}@bannerheal th.com  
 

Abstract 

Recent  advances  in   neuro imaging   techniques  provide   great  po tentials  for  
effec tive   d iagno sis   of   Alzhe imer ’s  d isease   (AD) ,   the mo st  common  form  of  
dementia .   Prev ious  s tud ies  have  shown   that   AD  is  c losely  related   to   the  
alterna tion  in  the  funct ional   brain  network ,   i.e. ,   the  functional  connec tivity  
among  d i fferent  brain  regions .   In  this  paper,   we   consider   the  prob lem  o f  
learning  functional  brain  connec tivity  from  neuro imaging,   wh ich  ho ld s 
great  promise   for   ident ifying  image -based   markers  used   to   d is tinguish  
Normal  Con tro ls  (NC) ,   pat ients  wi th  Mild   Cognit ive   Impairmen t  (MCI) ,  
and   patients  with  AD.  
  More  specifically,   we  s tudy  sparse  inverse  
covariance   est imation  (SICE) ,   also   known   as  exp loratory  Gaussian  
graphical  models,   for   brain  connec tivity  modeling.   In  particular,   we   app ly 
SICE   to   learn   and   analyze  functional  brain  connect ivity  pat terns  from 
d ifferent  sub ject  group s,   based   on  a  key  property  of   SICE ,   called   the  
“mono tone  property”   we   estab lished   in  th is  paper.   Our   experimen tal  results 
on  neuro imaging   PET  data  of  42   AD,   116  MCI ,   and   67   NC  sub jects  revea l  
severa l  interesting  connec tivity  pat terns  cons istent   with   literature  find ings,  
and  also  some  new patterns that can help  the knowledge d iscovery of  AD.        

 
 

1  

I n t r o d u c t i o n  

Alzhe imer ’s d isease   (AD)   is  a  fata l ,  neurodegenera tive d isorder  characterized  by progressive  
impairment  o f  memory  and   o ther   cogni tive  func tions .   It  is  the  mo st  common  form  of  
dementia   and   currently  a ffects  over   five  mi llion  Americans ;  this  number   wil l  grow  to   as  
many  as  14   mi llion  by  yea r   2 050 .   The  current  knowledge  about  the  cause  o f  AD   is  very 
limited ;  c linical  d iagnos is  is  imprecise  wi th   defini te  d iagnosis  only  poss ib le  by  autopsy; 
also ,  there   is curren tly no  cure for  AD,  wh ile mo st drugs only a lleviate  the symp toms .    

To   tackle   these  chal lenging  issues,   the  rap id ly  advanc ing  neuro imag ing  techniques  provide 
great  po tent ials.   These  techniques,   such  as  MRI ,   PET,   and   fMRI ,   produce  data  (images)   of  
brain  struc ture   and   funct ion ,   making  i t  possib le  to   iden tify  the  d i fference  between  AD  and  
norma l   brains.   Recen t  stud ies  have  demons trated   tha t   neuro imaging  data  provide  more 
sensit ive   and   consistent  measures  of  AD  onse t  and   progress ion  than  convent ional   clinical  

assessment and  neuropsycho logical  tests [ 1] .    

Recent stud ies have   found   that AD  is close l y  rela ted   to   the alternation  in  the  functional brain  
network,   i.e . ,   the  funct ional  connec tivity  among  d i fferen t  brain  regions  [ 2]-[3] .   Spec ifica lly,  
it  has  been  shown   that  func tiona l  connectivity  substan tially  decreases   between  the  
hippocampus  and   o ther   regions  o f  AD  brains  [ 3]-[4 ] .   Also ,   some  stud ies  have  found  
increased  connectivity between the reg ions in the frontal  lobe [ 6]-[7] .   

Learning  func tional  brain  connec tivity  from  neuro imaging  data  ho lds  great  promise  for  
identi fying  image -based   markers  used   to   d istingu ish  among  AD,   MCI   (M ild   Cogni tive 
Impairmen t) ,   and   norma l  ag ing.   No te  that   MCI   is  a  trans ition   stage  from  normal  aging   to 
AD.  Understand ing  and   prec ise   d iagnosis  of MCI   have  s igni ficant  c linical  value  since  it  can 
serve   as  an  early warning  sig n of AD.  Desp ite  a ll  these,   existing  research  in  functional brain 
connec tivity  mod eling  suffers  from  l imitat ions.   A  large  body  o f  func tiona l  connectivi ty 
modeling   has  been  based   on  correlation   ana lysis  [2]-[3] ,   [5] .   However,   correlation  only  
cap tures  pairwise  informat ion  and   fails  to   provide  a  comp lete  account  for   the  interac tion  of  
many  (more   than  two)   brain  reg ions.   Other   mu ltivariate  statistica l  methods  have  a lso   been  
used ,  such as Princip le Component Analys is  (PCA)   [ 8] ,  PCA-based  Scaled  Subprofile Model  
[9] ,   Independent  Componen t  Ana lysis  [ 10]-[11] ,   and   Partial  Least  Squares  [ 12]-[13] ,   which 
group   brain  regions  into   latent  components.   The  brain  regions  wi thin  each  component  are  
believed   to   have  strong  connectivi ty,   wh ile  the  connec t ivity  between  componen ts  is  weak.  
One  major   drawback  o f  these  methods  is  that  the  laten t   componen ts  may  no t  correspond   to 
any  b io log ical  enti ties,   causing  d i fficulty  in  in terpreta tion.   In  add ition,   graphica l   models 
have   been  used   to   study  brain  connectivi ty,   such  as  st ructural  equation  models  [14]-[15] , 
dynamic   causa l  mode ls  [ 16] ,   and   Granger   causa lity.   However,   most   of  these  approaches   are 
confirma tive,   rather   than  exp loratory,   in  the  sense  that  they  require  a  prior   model  of  brain  
connec tivity  to   begin  with.   This makes  them  inadequate   for   s tudying  AD   brain   connectiv ity,  
because   there   is  lit tle prior  knowledge about  wh ich  regions  shou ld  be  invo lved  and  how  they 
are  connec ted .  This makes exp loratory models highly desirab le.  

In  this  paper,   we   study  sparse   inver se  covarianc e  estimation  (SICE) ,   also   known  as 
exp loratory  Gaussian  graphical  models,   for   brain  connec tivi ty  modeling.   Inver se  covariance  
matrix  has  a   c lear   interpretation   that  the   o ff -d iagonal  elements   correspond   to   partial 
correlations,   i.e. ,   the   correla tion  between   each  pa ir   of  brain  regions  given  all  o ther   regions.  
This  provides  a  much  bette r   model  for   brain  connec tiv ity  than  simp le  correlation  analys is  
wh ich  models  each  pair   o f  regions  wi thout  consider ing  o ther   regions.   Also ,   imposing  
sparsity  on  the  inverse  covar iance  estima tion   ensures  a  reliab le  brain  connectivity  to   be  
modeled   wi th  limi ted   samp le  size,   which  is  usually  the  case  in  AD  stud ies  since   clinica l  
samp les  are  d i fficult  to   ob tain.   From  a  domain  perspec tive,   imposing  spars ity  is  also   valid  
because   neuro logical  find ings   have   demons trated   that  a  brain  region  usual ly  only   d irectly 
interac ts with  a   few o ther  brain  reg ions  in neuro logical processes  [ 2]-[3] .  Various  algorithms  
for  achieving SICE  have been developed   in  recent year   [ 17]-[22] .   In add ition,  SICE  ha s been 
used  in various app lications   [17] ,  [21] ,  [23] -[26] .   

In  th is  paper,   we  app ly  SICE   to   learn   funct ional  brain  connec tivity  from  neuro imaging   and  
analyze   the  d ifference  among  AD,  MCI ,   and  NC   based  on  a key property of SICE ,   ca lled   the 
“mono tone   property”   we  estab lished   in  th is  paper.   Unlike  the  previous  s tudy  wh ich  is  based  
on  a   spec ific  level  o f  sparsity  [26] ,   the  mono tone   property  a llows   us  to   study  the  
connec tivity  pattern  us ing  d i fferent  levels  o f  sparsity  and   ob tain  an  order   for   the  strength   of  
connec tion between pair s of brain  regions.   In add ition,  we app ly boo tstrap  hypo thes is   testing 
to  assess   the  sign ificance  o f  the  connection.  Our  experimental   results on  PET data of 42  AD,  
116   MCI ,   and   67   NC   sub jects  enro lled   in   the  Alzhe imer ’s  D isease  Neuro imaging  Initia tive  
pro ject  reveal  several  in teresting  connectivi ty  pat terns   consistent  wi th  literature  find ings,  
and  also  some new patterns that can help  the knowledge d iscovery of  AD.        

 
2  

S I C E :   B a c k g r o u n d   a n d   t h e   M o n o t o n e   P r o p e r t y  

An  inverse   covariance  mat rix  can  be  represented   graphically.   If  used   to   represent  brain  
connec tivity,   the  nodes  are  activa ted   brain  regions;   ex istence  of  an  arc  be tween  two   nodes 
means tha t the  two  brain reg ions are clo sely related  in the brain 's  functiona l process.    

 follows  a 
 be  all  the  brain  regions  under  study.    We  assume  that 
Let 
 and  covariance  matrix 
multivariate  Gaussian  distribution  with  mean 
 be  the 
.  Let 
inverse  covariance  matrix.  Suppose  we  have  
 sub jects  with  AD)   for   these  
 samp les  (e.g. ,  
brain  regions.   No te   that  we   wi ll  only  il lustrate   here  the  SICE   for   AD,   whereas  the  SICE   for  
MCI  and  NC can be ach ieved  in a  simi lar  way.    

We can  formula te the  SICE   into  an op timization prob lem,  i.e. ,    

                       

                                             (1) 

 deno te  the 
,   and  
,  
 is  the   samp le  covariance  ma trix ; 
where  
determinant,   trace ,   and   sum   of  the   abso lute  values  of  al l  elements  of  a  ma trix,   respective ly.  
”   in  (1)   is  the  log - like lihood ,  whereas   the  part  “
The  part  “
”  
represents  the  “sparsity”   o f  the   inverse  covar iance  matr ix 
.   (1)   aims  to   achieve  a  tradeoff  
between  the  likelihood   fit o f   the   inver se  covariance  es timate  and   the  spar sity.  The  tradeoff  is 
contro lled  by 
, called the regularization parameter; la rger  
 wi ll resu lt in more sparse est imate 
for  
-norm  regularization, which has been 
. The  formulation  in  (1)  follows  the  same  line of  the 
introduced  into  the  least  squares  formulation  to  achieve model  sparsity  and  the  resulting model  is 
called  Lasso  [27].  We   emp loy  the   algorithm  in  [19]   in  this  paper.   N ext ,  we  show  that  with 
 
going  from  small  to  large,  the  resulting  brain  connectivity  models  have  a  monotone  property. 
Before introducing the  mono tone property,  the  fo llowing definitions are needed .    

Definition :  In  the   graphica l  representat ion  of  the  inver se   covarianc e ,   i f  node 
 is  connected   to  
 by  an  arc ,   then 
to  
 is  called   a  “ne ighbor”  of 
.   If 
chain of arcs,  then 
 is cal led  a  “connectivity component” of 
.   

 is  connected  
 though  some 

Intuitively,  being ne ighbors means  that  two  nodes  (i. e. ,  brain  regions)  are d irectly  connected ,  
whereas  being  connec tivity  componen ts  means  tha t   two   brain  regions  are  ind irectly 
connec ted ,   i.e. ,   the  connection  is  med iated   through  o the r   regions.   In  o ther   words,   no t  being  
connec tivity  componen ts  (i.e . ,   two   nod es  comp letely  separated   in  the  graph)   means   that  the 
two   correspond ing  brain  regions  are  comp letely  independen t  of  each  o the r.   Connectiv ity 
components have the   fo llowing mono tone property:  

Monotone   property   of   SICE:  Let 
components of 
 wi th 
 and  

 be  the  sets  of  all   the  connectivity 
 and  
,  respectively.  I f 
,  then 
.    

Intuitively,   if  two   regions   are  connected   (either   d irectly  or   ind irect ly)   at  one   level  of 
sparseness  (
) ,   they  wi ll  be   connec ted   at  all  lower   leve ls  of  sparseness  (
) .   Proof 
of  the   mono tone  property  can  be  found   in  the  supp lementary  file   [29] .   This  mono tone 
property  can  be  used   to   identi fy  how  strongly  connected   each  node  (brain  region)  
 to   its 
connec tivity  component s.   For   examp le,   assuming  that  
, 
 and  
this  means  that 
 from  sma ll 
.   Thus,   by  changing 
 is  more  strongly  connected   to  
 than 
to   large ,   we   can  ob tain  an   order   for   the  streng th  o f  connec tion  between  pairs  of  brain  
regions.  As wi ll be  shown  in   Section 3 ,  this order  is d i ffe rent  among AD,  MCI ,  and  NC.  

 
3  
 
3 . 1  

 A p p l i c a t i o n   i n   B r a i n   C o n n e c t i v i t y   M o d e l i n g   o f  A D  

D a t a   a c q u i s i t i o n   a n d   p r e p r o c e s s i n g  

We apply SICE on FDG-PET  images  for 49 AD, 116 MCI, and 67 NC  subjects downloaded  from 
the  ADNI  website.  We  apply  Automated  Anatomical  Labeling  (AAL)  [28]  to  extract  data  from 
each  of  the  116  anatomical  volumes  of  interest  (AVOI),  and  derived  average  of  each  AVOI  for 
every subject. The AVOIs represent different regions of the whole brain.  

 
3 . 2  

B r a i n   c o n n e c t i v i t y   m o d e l i n g   b y   S I C E  

42  AVOIs  are  selected  for  brain  connectivity  modeling,  as  they  are  considered  to  be  potentially 
related to AD. These regions distribute in the frontal, parietal, occipital, and temporal lobes. Table 
1 list of the names of the AVOIs with their corresponding lobes. The number before each AVOI is 
used to index the node in the connectivity models.   

We  apply  the  SICE  algorithm  to  learn  one  connectivity  model  for  AD,  one  for MCI,  and  one  for 
NC, for a given 
. With different  ’s, the resulting connectivity models hold a monotone property, 
which can help obtain an order  for  the  strength of connection between brain  regions. To show  the 
order  clearly,  we  develop  a  tree-like  plot  in  Fig.  1,  which  is  for  the  AD  group.  To  generate  th is 
plot, we  start 
 at a very small value  (i.e.,  the  right-most of  the horizontal axis), which  results  in a 
fully-connected  connectivity model. A  fully-connected  connectivity model  is one  that  contains no 
region  disconnected  with  the  rest  of  the  brain.  Then,  we  decrease 
 by  small  steps  and  record  the 
order of the regions disconnected with the rest of the brain regions.   

Table 1: Names of the AVOIs for connectivity modeling (“L” means that the brain region 
is located at the left hemisphere; “R” means right hemisphere.) 

 

),  region  “Tempora_Sup_L”  is 
For  example,  in  Fig.  1,  as 
 (but  still  above 
 decreases  below   
the  first one  becoming disconnected  from  the  rest of  the  brain. As 
 decreases below   
 (but  still 
above 
),  the  rest  of  the  brain  further  divides  into  three  disconnected  clusters,  including  the 
cluster  of  “Cingulum_Post_R”  and  “Cingulum_Post_L”,  the  cluster  of  “Fusiform_R”  up  to 
“Hippocampus_L”, and  the cluster of  the other  regions. As 
 continuously decreases, each  current 
cluster will  split  into  smaller  clusters; eventually, when 
 reaches a very  large  value,  there will be 
no  arc  in  the  IC  model,  i.e.,  each  region  is  now  a  cluster  of  itself  and  the  split  will  stop.  The 
sequence  of  the  splitting  gives  an  order  for  the  strength  of  connection  between  brain  regions. 
Specifically, the earlier (i.e., smaller  ) a region or a cluster of regions becomes disconnected from 
the rest of the brain, the weaker it is connected with the rest of the brain. For example, in  Fig. 1, it 
can be known  that  “Tempora_Sup_L” may be  the weakest  region  in  the brain network of AD;  the 
second  weakest  ones  are  the  cluster  of  “Cingulum_Post_R”  and  “Cingulum_Post_L”,  and  the 
cluster of “Fusiform_R” up to “Hippocampus_L”. It is very  interesting to see that the weakest and 
second  weakest  brain  regions 
in 
the  brain  network 
include  “Cingulum_Post_R”  and 
“Cingulum_Post_L” as well as regions all in the temporal lobe, all of which have been found to be 
affected by AD early and severely [3]-[5].  

Next,  to facilitate the comparison between AD and NC, a  tree-like plot is also constructed for NC, 
as  shown  in  Fig.  2.  By  comparing  the  plots  for  AD  and  NC,  we  can  observe  the  following  two 
distinct  phenomena:  First,  in  AD,  between-lobe  connectivity  tends  to  be  weaker  than  within-lobe 
connectivity.  This  can  be  seen  from  Fig.  1  which  shows  a  clear  pattern  that  the  lobes  become 
disconnected  with  each other  before  the  regions within  each  lobe  become  disconnected with  each 
other,  as 
 goes  from  small  to  large.    This  pattern  does  not  show  in  Fig.  2  for  NC.  Second,  the 
same brain regions in the  left and right hemisphere are connected much weaker in AD than in NC. 
This  can  be  seen  from  Fig.  2  for  NC,  in  which  the  same  brain  regions  in  the  left  and  right 
hemisphere are  still connected even at a very large 
 for NC. However, this pattern does not show 
in Fig. 1 for AD.   

Furthermore, a  tree-like plot  is also constructed  for MCI  (Fig. 3), and compared with  the  plots  for 
AD  and NC.  In  terms of  the  two phenomena  discussed previously, MCI  shows  similar  patterns  to 
AD,  but  these  patterns  are  not  as  distinct  from  NC  as  AD.  Specifically,  in  terms  of  the  first 

1Frontal_Sup_L13Parietal_Sup_L21Occipital_Sup_L 27Temporal_Sup_L 2Frontal_Sup_R14Parietal_Sup_R22Occipital_Sup_R 28Temporal_Sup_R 3Frontal_Mid_L15Parietal_Inf_L23Occipital_Mid_L 29Temporal_Pole_Sup_L 4Frontal_Mid_R16Parietal_Inf_R24Occipital_Mid_R 30Temporal_Pole_Sup_R 5Frontal_Sup_Medial_L 17Precuneus_L25Occipital_Inf_L 31Temporal_Mid_L6Frontal_Sup_Medial_R 18Precuneus_R 26Occipital_Inf_R 32Temporal_Mid_R 7Frontal_Mid_Orb_L 19Cingulum_Post_L 33Temporal_Pole_Mid_L 8Frontal_Mid_Orb_R 20Cingulum_Post_R 34Temporal_Pole_Mid_R9Rectus_L35Temporal_Inf_L 830110Rectus_R36Temporal_Inf_R 830211Cingulum_Ant_L 37Fusiform_L 12Cingulum_Ant_R 38Fusiform_R 39Hippocampus_L 40Hippocampus_R 41ParaHippocampal_L 42ParaHippocampal_R Temporal lobeFrontal lobeParietal lobeOccipital lobephenomenon,  MCI  also  shows  weaker  between-lobe  connectivity  than  within-lobe  connectivity, 
which  is  similar  to  AD.  However,  the  degree  of  weakerness  is  not  as  distinctive  as  AD.  For 
example,  a  few  regions  in  the  temporal  lobe  of  MCI,  including  “Temporal_Mid_R”  and 
“Temporal_Sup_R”,  appear  to be more  strongly  connected with  the  occipital  lobe  than with other 
regions  in  the  temporal  lobe.  In  terms  of  the  second  phenomenon,  MCI  also  shows  weaker 
between-hemisphere  connectivity  in  the  same  brain  region  than  NC.  However,  the  degree  of 
weakerness  is  not  as  distinctive  as  AD.  For  example,  several  left-right  pairs  of  the  same  brain 
regions  are  still  connected  even  at  a  very  large 
,  such  as  “Rectus_R”  and  “Rectus_L”, 
“Frontal_Mid_Orb_R”  and  “Frontal_Mid_Orb  _L”,  “Parietal_Sup_R”  and  “Parietal_Sup_L”,  as 
well  as  “Precuneus_R”  and  “Precuneus_L”. All  above  findings  are  consistent with  the  knowledge 
that MCI is a transition stage between normal aging and AD.  

                

 

Fig 1:  Order for the strength of connection between brain regions of AD  

           Fig 2: Order for the strength of connection between brain regions of NC 

 

Small λLarge λλ3λ2λ1Small λLarge λ 

 

Fig 3: Order for the strength of connection between brain regions of MCI  

Furthermore,  we  would  like  to  compare  how  within-lobe  and  between-lobe  connectivity  is 
different across AD, MCI, and NC. To achieve  this, we  first learn one  connectivity model for AD, 
one  for  MCI,  and  one  for  NC.  We  adjust  the 
 in  the  learning  of  each  model  such  that  the  three 
models,  corresponding  to  AD,  MCI,  and  NC,  respectively,  will  have  the  same  total  number  of 
arcs.  This  is  to  “normalize”  the  models,  so  that  the  comparison  will  be more  focused  on  how  the 
arcs  distribute  differently  across  different  models.  By  selecting  different  values  for  the  total 
number  of  arcs,  we  can  obtain  models  representing  the  brain  connectivity  at  different  levels  of 
strength. Specifically, given a small value  for  the  total number of arcs, only strong arcs will show 
up in the resulting connectivity model, so the model is a model of strong brain connectivity; when 
increasing  the  total  number  of  arcs,  mild  arcs  will  also  show  up  in  the  resulting  connectivity 
model, so the model is a model of mild and strong brain connectivity.   

For example, Fig. 4 shows the connectivity models for AD, MCI, and NC with the total number of 
arcs  equal  to  50  (Fig.  4(a)),  120  (Fig.  4(b)),  and  180  (Fig.  4(c)).  In  this  paper,  we  use  a  “matrix” 
representation  for  the  SICE  of  a  connectivity model.  In  the matrix,  each  row  represents  one  node 
and each column also represents one node. Please see Table  1 for the correspondence between the 
numbering  of  the  nodes  and  the  brain  region  each  number  represents.  The  matrix  contains  black 
and  white  cells:  a  black  cell  at  the  -th  row,  -th  column  of  the  matrix  represents  existence  of  an 
arc  between  nodes 
 and 
 in  the  SICE-based  connectivity  model,  whereas  a  white  cell 
represents  absence  of  an  arc.  According  to  this  definition,  the  total  number  of  black  cells  in  the 
matrix is equal to twice  the  total number of arcs in the  SICE-based connectivity model. Moreover, 
on each matrix, four red cubes are used to highlight  the brain regions in each of the four lobes; that 
is,  from  top-left  to  bottom-right,  the  red  cubes  highlight  the  frontal,  parietal,  occipital,  and 
temporal lobes, respectively. The black cells inside each red cube reflect within -lobe connectivity, 
whereas the black cells outside the cubes reflect between-lobe connectivity.  

While  the  connectivity  models  in  Fig.  4  clearly  show  some  connectivity  difference  between  AD, 
MCI,  and  NC,  it  is  highly  desirable  to  test  if  the  observed  difference  is  statistically  sig nificant. 
Therefore,  we  further  perform  a  hypothesis  testing  and  the  results  are  summarized  in  Table  2. 
Specifically, a P-value is recorded in the sub-table if it is smaller than 0.1, such a P-value is further 
highlighted  if  it  is  even  smaller  than  0.05;  a   “---”  indicates  that  the  corresponding  test  is  not 
significant (P-value>0.1). We can observe from Fig. 4 and Table 2:  

Within-lobe  connectivity:  The  temporal  lobe  of  AD  has  significantly  less  connectivity  than  NC. 
This  is  true  across  different  strength  levels  (e.g.,  strong,  mild,  and  weak)  of  the  connectivity;  in 
other words, even the connectivity between some strongly-connected brain regions in the temporal 
lobe  may  be  disrupted  by  AD.  In  particular,  it  is  clearly  from  Fig.  4(b)  that  the  regions 
“Hippocampus”  and  “ParaHippocampal”  (numbered  by  39 -42,  located  at  the  right-bottom  corner 
of  Fig.  4(b))  are  much  more  separated  from  other  regions  in  AD  than  in  NC.  The  decrease  in 
connectivity  in  the  temporal  lobe  of AD,  especially  between  the  Hippocampus  and  other  regions, 
has been extensively reported in the literature [3]-[5]. Furthermore, the temporal lobe of MCI does 
not  show  a  significant  decrease  in  connectivity,  compared  with  NC.  This  may  be  because  MCI 
does not disrupt the temporal lobe as badly as AD.   

     AD                                   MCI                                      NC 

Fig 4(a): SICE-based brain connectivity models (total number of arcs equal to 50)  

     AD                                  MCI                                      NC  

Fig 4(b): SICE-based brain connectivity models (total number of arcs equal to 120)  

 

 

 

     AD                                  MCI                                      NC  

Fig 4(c): SICE-based brain connectivity models (total number of arcs equal to 180)  

 
The frontal lobe of AD has significantly more connectivity  than NC, which is true across different 
strength  levels  of  the  connectivity.  This  has  been  interpreted  as  compensatory  reallocation  or 
recruitment  of  cognitive  resources  [6]-[7].  Because  the  regions  in  the  frontal  lobe  are  typically 
affected later in the course of AD (our data are early AD), the increased connectivity in the frontal 
lobe may  help preserve  some  cognitive  functions  in AD  patients.  Furthermore,  the  frontal  lobe  of 
MCI  does  not  show  a  significant  increase  in  connectivity,  compared  with  NC.  This  indicates  that 
the compensatory effect in MCI brain may not be as strong as that in AD brains.  

Table 2: P-values from the statistical significance test of connectivity difference among 
AD, MCI, and NC 

(a) Total number of arcs = 50     (b) Total number of arcs = 120   (c) Total number of arcs = 180  

 

 

 

There is no significant difference among AD, MCI, and NC in terms of the connectivity within the 
parietal lobe and within the occipital lobe. Another interesting finding is that all the P -values in the 
third  sub-table  of  Table  2(a)  are  insignificant.  This  implies  that  distribution  of  the  strong 
connectivity within and between lobes for MCI is very similar to NC; in other words, MCI has not 
been  able  to disrupt  the  strong  connectivity  among brain  regions  (it disrupts  some mild  and weak 
connectivity though).   

Between-lobe  connectivity:  In  general,  human  brains  tend  to  have  less  between-lobe  connectivity 
than within-lobe connectivity. A majority of the strong connectivity occurs within lobes, but rarely 
between  lobes.  These  can  be  clearly  seen  from  Fig.  4  (especially  Fig.  4(a))  in  which  there  are 
much  more  black  cells  along  the  diagonal  direction  than  the  off-diagonal  direction,  regardless  of 
AD, MCI, and NC.  

The  connectivity  between  the  parietal  and  occipital  lobes  of  AD  is  significantly  more  than  NC 
which  is  true  especially  for  mild  and  weak  connectivity.  The  increased  connectivity  between  the 
parietal  and  occipital  lobes  of  AD  has  been  previously  reported  in  [3].  It  is  also  interpreted  as  a 
compensatory  effect  in  [6]-[7].  Furthermore, MCI  also  shows  increased  connectivity  between  the 
parietal and occipital lobes, compared with NC, but the increase is not as significant as AD.  

While the connectivity between the  frontal and occipital lobes shows little difference between AD 
and  NC,  such  connectivity  for  MCI  shows  a  significant  decrease  especially  for  mild  and  weak 
connectivity.  Also,  AD  may  have  less  temporal-occipital  connectivity,  less  frontal-parietal 
connectivity, but more parietal-temporal connectivity than NC.   

Between-hemisphere connectivity: Recall  that we have observed  from  the  tree -like plots  in Figs.  3 
and  4  that  the  same  brain  regions  in  the  left  and  right  hemisphere  are  connected  much  weaker  in 
AD  than  in  NC.  It  is  desirable  to  test  if  this  observed  difference  is  statistically  significant.  To 
achieve this, we test the statistical significance of the difference among AD, MCI, and NC, in term 
of  the  number of  connected  same -region  left-right pairs. Results  show  that when  the  total number 
of  arcs  in  the  connectivity models  is  equal  to  120  or 90, none  of  the  tests  is  significant. However, 
when  the  total  number  of  arcs  is  equal  to  50,  the  P -values  of  the  tests  for  “AD  vs. NC”,  “AD  vs. 
MCI”,  and  “MCI  vs.  NC”  are  0.009,  0.004,  and  0.315,  respectively. We  further  perform  tests  for 
the  total  number  of  arcs  equal  to  30  and  find  the  P -values  to  be  0.  0055,  0.053 ,  and  0.158, 
respectively.  These  results  indicate  that  AD  disrupts  the  strong  connectivity  between  the  same 
regions of the left and right hemispheres, whereas this disruption is not significant in MCI.    

 
4  

  C o n c l u s i o n  

In  the  paper, we  applied SICE  to model  functional  brain  connectivity of AD, MCI,  and  NC  based 
on PET neuroimaging data, and analyze the patterns based on the monotone property of SICE . Our 
findings  were  consistent  with  the  previous  literature  and  also  showed  some  new  aspects  that may 
suggest further investigation in brain connectivity research  in the future.  

R e f e r e n c e s  

[1]   S .  Mo lchan .  (2005)  The  Alzheimer 's  d isease  neuro imaging  in i t iat ive.   Business  Brie fing:   US  
Neuro logy Review,  pp .30 -32 ,  2005 .   
[2]  C.J.  Stam,  B.F.  Jones,  G.  Nolte,  M.  Breakspear,  and  P.  Scheltens.  (2007)  Small-world  networks  and 
functional connectivity in Alzheimer’s disease. Cerebral Corter 17:92-99. 
[3]  K.  Supekar,  V.  Menon,  D.  Rubin,  M.  Musen,  M.D.  Greicius.  (2008)        Network  Analysis  of  Intrinsic 
Functional Brain Connectivity in Alzheimer's Disease. PLoS Comput Biol 4(6) 1 -11. 
[4]  K.  Wang,  M.  Liang,  L.  Wang,  L.  Tian,  X.  Zhang,  K.  Li  and  T.  Jiang.  (2007)  Altered  Functional 
Connectivity  in  Early  Alzheimer’s  Disease:  A  Resting-State  fMRI  Study,  Human  Brain  Mapping  28,  967 -
978. 
[5] N.P. Azari, S.I. Rapoport, C.L. Grady, M.B. Schapiro,  J.A. Salerno, A. Gonzales-Aviles.  (1992) Patterns 
of  interregional  correlations  of  cerebral  glucose  metabolic  rates  in  patients  with  dementia  of  the  Alzheimer 
type. Neurodegeneration 1: 101–111. 
[6]  R.L.  Gould,  B.Arroyo,  R,G.  Brown,  A.M.  Owen,  E.T.  Bullmore  and  R.J .  Howard.  (2006)  Brain 
Mechanisms of Successful Compensation during Learning in Alzheimer Disease, Neurology 67, 1011 -1017. 
[7] Y.  Stern.  (2006)  Cognitive  Reserve  and Alzheimer Disease,  Alzheimer  Disease  Associated Disorder  20, 
69-74. 
[8] K.J. Friston. (1994) Functional and effective connectivity: A synthesis. Human Brain Mapping 2, 56 -78. 
[9] G. Alexander, J. Moeller. (1994) Application of  the Scaled Subprofile model: a statistical approach  to  the 
analysis  of  functional  patterns  in  neuropsychiatric  disorders:  A  principal  component  approach  to  modeling 
regional patterns of brain function in disease. Human Brain Mapping, 79-94. 
[10] V.D. Calhoun, T. Adali, G.D. Pearlson,  J.J. Pekar.  (2001)  Spatial  and  temporal  independent component 
analysis of functional MRI data containing a pair of task-related waveforms. Hum.Brain Mapp. 13, 43-53. 
[11] V.D. Calhoun, T. Adali, J.J. Pekar, G.D. Pearlson. (2003) Latency (in)sensitive ICA. Group independent 
component analysis of fMRI data in the temporal frequency domain. Neuro image. 20, 1661-1669. 
[12]  A.R.  McIntosh,  F.L.  Bookstein,  J.V.  Haxby,  C.L.  Grady.  (1996)  Spatial  pattern  analysis  of  functional 
brain images using partial least squares. Neuroimage. 3, 143-157. 
[13]  K.J.  Worsley,  J.B.  Poline,  K.J.  Friston,  A.C.  Evans.  (1997)  Characterizing  the  response  of  PET  and 
fMRI data using multivariate linear models. Neuroimage. 6, 305 -319. 
[14]  E.  Bullmore,  B.  Horwitz,  G.  Honey,  M.  Brammer,  S.  Williams,  T.  Sharma.  (2000)  How  good  is  good 
enough in path analysis of fMRI data? NeuroImage 11, 289–301. 
[15] A.R. McIntosh,  C.L. Grady,  L.G. Ungerieider,  J.V. Haxby,  S.I.  Rapoport,  B. Horwitz.  (1994) Network 
analysis of cortical visual pathways mapped with PET. J. Neurosci. 14 (2), 655–666. 
[16] K.J. Friston, L. Harrison, W. Penny. (2003) Dynamic causal modelling. Neuroimage 19, 1273-1302. 
[17]  O.  Banerjee,  L.  El  Ghaoui,  and  A.  d’Aspremont.  (2008)  Model  selection  through  sparse  maximum 
likelihood  estimation  for multivariate  gaussian  or  binary  data.  Journal of Machine Learning Research  9:485-
516. 
[18] J. Dahl, L. Vandenberghe, and V. Roycowdhury. (2008) Covariance selection for nonchordal graphs via 
chordal embedding. Optimization Methods Software 23(4):501-520. 
[19]  J.  Friedman,  T.astie,  and  R.  Tibsirani.  (2007)  Spares  inverse  covariance  estimat ion  with  the  graphical 
lasso, Biostatistics 8(1):1-10. 
[20]  J.Z. Huang, N. Liu, M. Pourahmadi,  and L. Liu.  (2006) Covariance matrix  selection  and  estimation  via 
penalized normal likelihood. Biometrika, 93(1):85-98. 
[21] H. Li and J. Gui. (2005) Gradient directed regularization for sparse Gaussian concentration graphs, with 
applications to inference of genetic networks. Biostatistics 7(2):302-317. 
[22] Y. Lin.  (2007) Model  selection and estimation  in  the gaussian graphical model. Biometrika 94(1)19 -35, 
2007. 
[23]  A.  Dobra,  C.  Hans,  B.  Jones,  J.R.  Nevins,  G.  Yao,  and  M.  West.  (2004)  Sparse  graphical  models  for 
exploring gene expression data. Journal of Multivariate Analysis 90(1):196 -212. 
[24] A. Berge, A.C. Jensen, and A.H.S. Solberg. (2007) Sparse inverse covariance estimates for hyperspectral 
image classification, Geoscience and Remote Sensing, IEEE Transactions on, 45(5):1399 -1407. 
[25] J.A. Bilmes. (2000) Factored sparse inverse covariance matrices. In ICASSP:1009 -1012.  
[26]  L.  Sun  and  et  al.  (2009)  Mining  Brain  Region  Connectivity  for  Alzheimer's  Disease  Study  via  Sparse 
Inverse Covariance Estimation. In KDD: 1335-1344. 
[27]  R.  Tibshirani.  (1996)  Regression  shrinkage  and  selection  via  the  lasso.  Journal  of  the  Royal  Statistical 
Society Series B 58(1):267-288. 
[28] N. Tzourio-Mazoyer and et al. (2002) Automated anatomical labeling of activations in SPM using a  
macroscopic anatomical parcellation of the MNI MRI single subject brain. Neuroimage 15:273 -289. 
[29] Supplemental  information for “Learning Brain Connectivity of Alzheimer's Disease  from Neuroimaging 
Data”. http://www.public.asu.edu/~jye02/Publications/AD-supplemental-NIPS09.pdf 

