Optimal models of sound localization by barn owls

Brian J. Fischer
Division of Biology
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA
fischerb@caltech.edu

Abstract

Sound localization by barn owls is commonly modeled as a matching procedure
where localization cues derived from auditory inputs are compared to stored tem-
plates. While the matching models can explain properties of neural responses, no
model explains how the owl resolves spatial ambiguity in the localization cues to
produce accurate localization for sources near the center of gaze. Here, I exam-
ine two models for the barn owl’s sound localization behavior. First, I consider
a maximum likelihood estimator in order to further evaluate the cue matching
model. Second, I consider a maximum a posteriori estimator to test whether a
Bayesian model with a prior that emphasizes directions near the center of gaze
can reproduce the owl’s localization behavior. I show that the maximum likeli-
hood estimator can not reproduce the owl’s behavior, while the maximum a poste-
riori estimator is able to match the behavior. This result suggests that the standard
cue matching model will not be sufﬁcient to explain sound loc alization behavior in
the barn owl. The Bayesian model provides a new framework for analyzing sound
localization in the barn owl and leads to predictions about the owl’s localization
behavior.

1 Introduction

Barn owls, the champions of sound localization, show systematic errors when localizing sounds.
Owls localize broadband noise signals with great accuracy for source directions near the center of
gaze [1]. However, localization errors increase as source directions move to the periphery, consistent
with an underestimate of the source direction [1]. Behavioral experiments show that the barn owl
uses the interaural time difference (ITD) for localization in the horizontal dimension and the interau-
ral level difference (ILD) for localization in the vertical dimension [2]. Direct measurements of the
sounds received at the ears for sources at different locations in space show that disparate directions
are associated with very similar localization cues. Speciﬁ cally, there is a similarity between ILD
and ITD cues for directions near the center of gaze and directions with eccentric elevations on the
vertical plane. How does the owl resolve this ambiguity in the localization cues to produce accurate
localization for sound sources near the center of gaze?

Theories regarding the use of localization cues by the barn owl are drawn from the extensive knowl-
edge of processing in the barn owl’s auditory system. Neurophysiological and anatomical studies
show that the barn owl’s auditory system contains specialized circuitry that is devoted to extracting
spectral ILD and ITD cues and processing them to derive source direction information [2]. It has
been suggested that a spectral matching operation between ILD and ITD cues computed from audi-
tory inputs and preferred ILD and ITD spectra associated with spatially selective auditory neurons
underlies the derivation of spatial information from the auditory cues [3 –6]. The spectral matching
models reproduce aspects of neural responses, but none reproduces the sound localization behavior
of the barn owl. In particular, the spectral matching models do not describe how the owl resolves am-
biguities in the localization cues. In addition to spectral matching of localization cues, it is possible

1

that the owl incorporates prior experience or beliefs into the process of deriving direction estimates
from the auditory input signals. These two approaches to sound localization can be formalized using
the language of estimation theory as maximum likelihood (ML) and Bayesian solutions, respectively.

Here, I examine two models for the barn owl’s sound localization behavior in order to further evalu-
ate the spectral matching model and to test whether a Bayesian model with a prior that emphasizes
directions near the center of gaze can reproduce the owl’s localization behavior. I begin by viewing
the sound localization problem as a statistical estimation problem. Maximum likelihood and max-
imum a posteriori (MAP) solutions to the estimation problem are compared with the localization
behavior of a barn owl in a head turning task.

2 Observation model

To de ﬁne the localization problem, we must specify an observ ation model that describes the infor-
mation the owl uses to produce a direction estimate. Neurophysiological and behavioral experiments
suggest that the barn owl derives direction estimates from ILD and ITD cues that are computed at an
array of frequencies [2, 7, 8]. Note that when computed as a function of frequency, the ITD is given
by an interaural phase difference (IPD).

Here I consider a model where the observation made by the owl is given by the ILD and IPD spectra
derived from barn owl head-related transfer functions (HRTFs) after corruption with additive noise.
For a source direction (θ, φ), the observation vector r is expressed mathematically as
rIPD (cid:21) = (cid:20) ILDθ ,φ
r = (cid:20) rILD
IPDθ ,φ (cid:21) + (cid:20) ηILD
ηIPD (cid:21)
where the ILD spectrum ILDθ ,φ = [ILDθ ,φ(ω1 ), ILDθ ,φ(ω2 ), . . . , ILDθ ,φ(ωNf )] and the IPD spec-
trum IPDθ ,φ = [IPDθ ,φ(ω1 ), IPDθ ,φ (ω2 ), . . . , IPDθ ,φ (ωNf )] are speciﬁed at a ﬁnite number of fre-
quencies. The ILD and IPD cues are computed directly from the HRTFs as
|ˆhR(θ ,φ)(ω )|
|ˆhL(θ ,φ)(ω )|

ILDθ ,φ(ω ) = 20 log10

(1)

(2)

and

IPDθ ,φ (ω ) = ϕR(θ ,φ)(ω ) − ϕL(θ ,φ)(ω ),
where the left and right HRTFs are written as ˆhL(θ ,φ)(ω ) = |ˆhL(θ ,φ)(ω )|eiϕL(θ,φ) (ω) and
ˆhR(θ ,φ)(ω ) = |ˆhR(θ ,φ)(ω )|eiϕR(θ,φ) (ω) , respectively.
The noise corrupting the ILD spectrum is modeled as a Gaussian random vector with independent
and identically distributed (i.i.d.) components, ηILD (ωj ) ∼ N (0, σ). The IPD spectrum noise vector
is assumed to have i.i.d. components where each element has a von Mises distribution with parame-
ter κ. The von Mises distribution can be viewed as a 2π-periodic Gaussian distribution for large κ
and is a uniform distribution for κ = 0 [9]. I assume that the ILD and IPD noise terms are mutually
independent.

(3)

With this noise model, the likelihood function has the form
pr|Θ,Φ (r|θ, φ) = prILD |Θ,Φ (rILD |θ, φ)prIPD |Θ,Φ (rIPD |θ, φ)
where the ILD likelihood function is given by

prILD |Θ,Φ (rILD |θ, φ) =

1
(2πσ2 )Nf /2 exp[−
and the IPD likelihood function is given by

1
2σ2

Nf
Xj=1

(rILD (ωj ) − ILDθ ,φ(ωj ))2 ]

(4)

(5)

prIPD |Θ,Φ (rIPD |θ, φ) =

Nf
Xj=1
where I0 (κ) is a modiﬁed Bessel function of the ﬁrst kind of order
0. The likelihood function will
have peaks at directions where the expected spectral cues ILDθ ,φ and IPDθ ,φ are near the observed
values rILD and rIPD .

cos(rIPD (ωj ) − IPDθ ,φ (ωj ))]

1
(2πI0 (κ))Nf

exp[κ

(6)

2

3 Model performance measure

I evaluate maximum likelihood and maximum a posteriori methods for estimating the source direc-
tion from the observed ILD and IPD cues by computing an expected localization error and compar-
ing the results to an owl’s behavior. The performance of each estimation procedure at a given source
direction is quantiﬁed by the expected absolute angular err or E [| ˆθ(r) − θ| + | ˆφ(r) − φ| | θ, φ]. This
measure of estimation error is directly compared to the behavioral performance of a barn owl in
a head turning localization task [1]. The expected absolute angular error is approximated through
Monte Carlo simulation as
E [| ˆθ(r) − θ| + | ˆφ(r) − φ| | θ, φ] ≈ µ({| ˆθ(ri ) − θ|}N
i=1 ) + µ({| ˆφ(ri ) − φ|}N
(7)
i=1 )
where the ri are drawn from pr|Θ,Φ (r|θ, φ) and µ({θi}N
i=1 ) is the circular mean of the angles
i=1 . The error is computed using HRTFs for two barn owls [10] and is calculated for direc-
{θi}N
tions in the frontal hemisphere with 5◦ increments in azimuth and elevation, as de ﬁned using double
polar coordinates.

4 Maximum likelihood estimate

The maximum likelihood direction estimate is derived from the observed noisy ILD and IPD cues
by ﬁnding the source direction that maximizes the likelihoo d function, yielding
( ˆθML (r), ˆφML (r)) = arg max
(θ ,φ)
This procedure amounts to a spectral cue matching operation. Each direction in space is associated
with a particular ILD and IPD spectrum, as derived from the HRTFs. The direction with associated
cues that are closest to the observed cues is designated as the estimate. This estimator is of particular
interest because of the claim that salience in the neural map of auditory space in the barn owl can be
described by a spectral cue matching operation [3, 4, 6].

pr|Θ,Φ (r|θ, φ).

(8)

The maximum likelihood estimator was unable to reproduce the owl’s localization behavior. The
performance of the maximum likelihood estimator depends on the two likelihood function parame-
ters σ and κ, which determine the ILD and IPD noise variances, respectively. For noise variances
large enough that the error increased at peripheral directions, in accordance with the barn owl’s
behavior, the error also increased signiﬁcantly for direct ions near the center of the interaural coordi-
nate system (Figure 1). This pattern of error as a function of eccentricity, with a large central peak,
is not consistent with the performance of the barn owl in the head turning task [1]. Additionally,
directions near the center of gaze were often confused with directions in the periphery leading to a
high variability in the direction estimates, which is not seen in the owl’s behavior.

5 Maximum a posteriori estimate

In the Bayesian framework, the direction estimate depends on both the likelihood function and the
prior distribution over source directions through the posterior distribution. Using Bayes’ rule, the
posterior density is proportional to the product of the likelihood function and the prior,

(9)
pΘ,Φ|r(θ, φ|r) ∝ pr|Θ,Φ(r|θ, φ)pΘ,Φ (θ, φ).
The prior distribution is used to summarize the owl’s belief about the most likely source directions
before an observation of ILD and IPD cues is made. Based on the barn owl’s tendency to underes-
timate source directions [1], I use a prior that emphasizes directions near the center of gaze. The
prior is given by a product of two one-dimensional von Mises distributions, yielding the probability
density function

pΘ,Φ (θ, φ) =

exp[κ1 cos(θ) + κ2 cos(φ)]
(2π)2 I0 (κ1 )I0 (κ2 )
where I0 (κ) is a modiﬁed Bessel function of the ﬁrst kind of order
0. The maximum a posteriori
source direction estimate is computed for a given observation by ﬁnding the source direction that
maximizes the posterior density, yielding
( ˆθMAP (r), ˆφMAP (r)) = arg max
(θ ,φ)

pΘ,Φ|r(θ, φ|r).

(10)

(11)

3

Figure 1: Estimation error in the model for the maximum likelihood (ML) and maximum a posteriori
(MAP) estimates. HRTFs were used from owls 884 (top) and 880 (bottom). Left column: Estimation
error at 685 locations in the frontal hemisphere plotted in double polar coordinates. Center column:
Estimation error on the horizontal plane along with the estimation error of a barn owl in a head
turning task [1]. Right column: Estimation error on the vertical plane along with the estimation
error of a barn owl in a head turning task. Note that each plot uses a unique scale.

4

Figure 2: Estimates for the MAP estimator on the horizontal plane (left) and the vertical plane (right)
using HRTFs from owl 880. The box extends from the lower quartile to the upper quartile of the
sample. The solid line is the identity line. Like the owl, the MAP estimator underestimates the
source direction.

In the MAP case, the estimate depends on spectral matching of observations with expected cues for
each direction, but with a penalty on the selection of peripheral directions.

It was possible to ﬁnd a MAP estimator that was consistent wit h the owl’s localization behavior
(Figures 1,2). For the example MAP estimators shown in Figures 1 and 2, the error was smallest in
the central region of space and increased at the periphery. The largest errors occurred at the vertical
extremes. This pattern of error qualitatively matches the pattern of error displayed by the owl in a
head turning localization task [1].

The parameters that produced a behaviorally consistent MAP estimator correspond to a likelihood
and prior with large variances. For the estimators shown in Figure 1, the likelihood function para-
meters were given by σ = 11.5 dB and κ = 0.75 for owl 880 and σ = 10.75 dB and κ = 0.8 for owl
884. For comparison, the range of ILD values normally experienced by the barn owl falls between
± 30 dB [10]. The prior parameters correspond to an azimuthal width parameter κ1 of 0.25 for owl
880 and 0.2 for owl 884 and an elevational width parameter κ2 of 0.25 for owl 880 and 0.18 for owl
884.

The implication of this model for implementation in the owl’s auditory system is that the spectral
localization cues ILD and IPD do not need to be computed with great accuracy and the emphasis on
central directions does not need to be large in order to produce the barn owl’s behavior.

6 Discussion

6.1 A new approach to modeling sound localization in the barn owl

The simulation results show that the maximum likelihood model considered here can not reproduce
the owl’s behavior, while the maximum a posteriori solution is able to match the behavior. This
result suggests that the standard spectral matching model will not be sufﬁcient to explain sound lo-
calization behavior in the barn owl. Previously, suggestions have been made that sound localization
by the barn owl can be described using the Bayesian framework [11, 12], but no speciﬁc models
have been proposed. This paper demonstrates that a Bayesian model can qualitatively match the
owl’s localization behavior. The Bayesian approach described here provides a new framework for
analyzing sound localization in the owl.

6.2 Failure of the maximum likelihood model

The maximum likelihood model fails because of the nature of spatial ambiguity in the ILD and
IPD cues. The existence of spatial ambiguity has been noted in previous descriptions of barn owl
HRTFs [3, 10, 13]. As expected, directions near each other have similar cues. In addition to sim-

5

ilarity of cues between proximal directions, distant directions can have similar ILD and IPD cues.
Most signiﬁcantly, there is a similarity between the ILD and IPD cues at the center of gaze and at
peripheral directions on the vertical plane. The consequence of such ambiguity between distant di-
rections is that noise in measuring localization cues can lead to large errors in direction estimation,
as seen in the ML estimate. The results of the simulations suggest that a behaviorally accurate so-
lution to the sound localization problem must include a mechanism that chooses between disparate
directions which are associated with similar localization cues in such a way as to limit errors for
source directions near the center of gaze. This work shows that a possible mechanism for choosing
between such directions is to incorporate a bias towards directions at the center of gaze through a
prior distribution and utilize the Bayesian estimation framework. The use of a prior that emphasizes
directions near the center of gaze is similar to the use of central weighting functions in models of
human lateralization [14].

6.3 Predictions of the Bayesian model

The MAP estimator predicts the underestimation of peripheral source directions on the horizontal
and vertical planes (Figure 2). The pattern of error displayed by the MAP estimator qualitatively
matches the owl’s behavioral performance by showing increasing error as a function of eccentricity.
Our evaluation of the model performance is limited, however, because there is little behavioral data
for directions outside ± 70 deg [15, 16]. For the owl whose performance is displayed in Figure 1, the
largest errors on the vertical and horizontal planes were less than 20 deg and 11 deg, respectively.
The model produces much larger errors for directions beyond 70 deg, especially on the vertical plane.
The large errors in elevation result from the ambiguity in the localization cues on the vertical plane
and the shape of the prior distribution. As discussed above, for broadband noise stimuli, there is a
similarity between the ILD and IPD cues for central and peripheral directions on the vertical plane
[3, 10, 13]. The presence of a prior distribution that emphasizes central directions causes direction
estimates for both central and peripheral directions to be concentrated near zero deg. Therefore,
estimation errors are minimal for sources at the center of gaze, but approach the magnitude of the
source direction for peripheral source directions. Behavioral data shows that localization accuracy
is the greatest near the center of gaze [1], but there is no data for localization performance at the
most eccentric directions on the vertical plane. Further behavioral experiments must be performed
to determine if the owl’s error increases greatly at the most peripheral directions.

There is a signiﬁcant spatial ambiguity in the localization cues when target sounds are narrow-
band. It is well known that spatial ambiguity arises from the way that interaural time differences are
processed at each frequency [17 –19]. The owl measures the in teraural time difference for each fre-
quency of the input sound as an interaural phase difference. Therefore, multiple directions in space
that differ in their associated interaural time difference by the period of a tone at that frequency are
consistent with the same interaural phase difference and can not be distinguished. Behavioral exper-
iments show that the owl may localize a phantom source in the horizontal dimension when the signal
is a tone [20]. Based on the presence of a prior that emphasizes directions near the center of gaze,
I predict that for low frequency tones where phase equivalent directions lie near the center of gaze
and at directions greater than 80 deg, confusion will always lead to an estimate of a source direction
near zero degrees. This prediction can not be evaluated from available data because localization of
tonal signals has only been systematically studied using 5 kHz tones with target directions at ± 20
deg [19]. Because the prior is broad, the target direction of ± 20 deg and the phantom direction of
± 50 deg may both be considered central.
The ILD cue also displays a signiﬁcant ambiguity at high freq uencies. At frequencies above 7 kHz,
the ILD is non-monotonically related to the vertical position of a sound source [3, 10] (Figure 3).
Therefore, for narrowband sounds, the owl can not uniquely determine the direction of a sound
source from the ITD and ILD cues.
I predict that for tonal signals above 7 kHz, there will be
multiple directions on the vertical plane that are confused with directions near zero deg. I predict
that confusion between source directions near zero deg and eccentric directions will always lead to
estimates of directions near zero deg. There is no available data to evaluate this prediction.

6

Figure 3: Model predictions for localization of tones on the vertical plane. (A) ILD as a function of
elevation at 8 kHz, computed from HRTFs of owl 880 recorded by Keller et al. (1998). (B) Given
an ILD of 0 dB, a likelihood function (dots) based on matching cues to expected values would be
multimodal with three equal peaks. If the target is at any of the three directions, there will be large
localization errors because of confusion with the other directions. If a prior emphasizing frontal
space (dashed) is included, a posterior density equal to the product of the likelihood and the prior
would have a main peak at 0 deg elevation. Using a maximum a posteriori estimate, large errors
would be made if the target is above or below. However, few errors would be observed when the
target is near 0 deg.

6.4 Testing the Bayesian model

Further head turning localization experiments with barn owls must be performed to test predictions
generated by the Bayesian hypothesis and to provide constraints on a model of sound localization.
Experiments should test the localization accuracy of the owl for broadband noise sources and tonal
signals at directions covering the frontal hemisphere. The Bayesian model will be supported if, ﬁrst,
localization accuracy is high for both tonal and broadband noise sources near the center of gaze
and, second, peripherally located sources are confused for targets near the center of gaze, leading
to large localization errors. Additionally, a Bayesian model should be ﬁt to the data, including
points away from the horizontal and vertical planes, using a nonparametric prior [21, 22]. While the
model presented here, using a von Mises prior, qualitatively matches the performance of the owl, the
performance of the Bayesian model may be improved by removing assumptions about the structure
of the prior distribution.

6.5 Implications for neural processing

The analysis presented here does not directly address the neural implementation of the solution
to the localization problem. However, our abstract analysis of the sound localization problem has
implications for neural processing. Several models exist that reproduce the basic properties of ILD,
ITD, and space selectivity in ICx and OT neurons using a spectral matching procedure [3, 5, 6].
These results suggest that a Bayesian model is not necessary to describe the responses of individual
ICx and OT neurons. It may be necessary to look in the brainstem motor targets of the optic tectum
to ﬁnd neurons that resolve the ambiguity present in sound st imuli and show responses that re ﬂect
the MAP solution. This implies that the prior distribution is not employed until the ﬁnal stage of
processing. The prior may correspond to the distribution of best directions of space-speciﬁc neurons
in ICx and OT, which emphasizes directions near the center of gaze [23].

6.6 Conclusion

This analysis supports the Bayesian model of the barn owl’s solution to the localization problem
over the maximum likelihood model. This result suggests that the standard spectral matching model
will not be sufﬁcient to explain sound localization behavio r in the barn owl. The Bayesian model

7

provides a new framework for analyzing sound localization in the owl. The simulation results using
the MAP estimator lead to testable predictions that can be used to evaluate the Bayesian model of
sound localization in the barn owl.

Acknowledgments

I thank Kip Keller, Klaus Hartung, and Terry Takahashi for providing the head-related transfer
functions and Mark Konishi and Jos ´e Luis Pe ˜na for comments and support.

References

[1] E.I. Knudsen, G.G. Blasdel, and M. Konishi. Sound localization by the barn owl (Tyto alba) measured
with the search coil technique. J. Comp. Physiol., 133:1–11, 1979.
[2] M. Konishi. Coding of auditory space. Annu. Rev. Neurosci., 26:31–55, 2003.
[3] M.S. Brainard, E.I. Knudsen, and S.D. Esterly. Neural derivation of sound source location: Resolution of
spatial ambiguities in binaural cues. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 91(2):1015–1027, 1992.
[4] B.J. Arthur. Neural computations leading to space-speci ﬁc auditory responses in the barn owl. Ph.D.
thesis, Caltech, 2001.
[5] B.J. Fischer. A model of the computations leading to a representation of auditory space in the midbrain
of the barn owl. D.Sc. thesis, Washington University in St. Louis, 2005.
[6] C.H. Keller and T.T. Takahashi. Localization and identi ﬁcation of concurrent sounds in the owl’s auditory
space map. J. Neurosci., 25:10446–10461, 2005.
[7] I. Poganiatz and H. Wagner. Sound-localization experiments with barn owls in virtual space: inﬂuence of
broadband interaural level difference on head-turning behavior. J. Comp. Physiol. A, 187:225–233, 2001.
[8] D.R. Euston and T.T. Takahashi. From spectrum to space: The contribution of level difference cues to
spatial receptive ﬁelds in the barn owl inferior colliculus . J. Neurosci., 22(1):284–293, Jan. 2002.
[9] Evans M., Hastings N., and Peacock B. von Mises Distribution. In Statistical Distributions, 3rd ed., pages
189–191. Wiley, New York, 2000.
[10] C.H. Keller, K. Hartung, and T.T. Takahashi. Head-related transfer functions of the barn owl: measure-
ment and neural responses. Hearing Research, 118:13–34, 1998.
[11] R.O. Duda. Elevation dependence of the interaural transfer function, chapter 3 in Binaural and Spatial
Hearing in Real and Virtual Environments, pages 49–75. New J ersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
1997.
[12] Witten I.B. and Knudsen E.I. Why seeing is believing: Merging auditory and visual worlds. Neuron,
48:489–496, 2005.
[13] J.F Olsen, E.I. Knudsen, and S.D. Esterly. Neural maps of interaural time and intensity differences in the
optic tectum of the barn owl. J. Neurosci., 9:2591–2605, 1989.
[14] R.M. Stern and H.S. Colburn. Theory of binaural interaction based on auditory-nerve data. IV. A model
for subjective lateral position. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 64:127–140, 1978.
[15] H. Wagner. Sound-localization deﬁcits induced by lesi ons in the barn owl’s auditory space map. J.
Neurosci., 13:371–386, 1993.
[16] I. Poganiatz, I. Nelken, and H. Wagner. Sound-localization experiments with barn owls in virtual space:
inﬂuence of interaural time difference on head-turning beh avior. J. Ass. Res. Otolarnyg., 2:1–21, 2001.
[17] T. Takahashi and M. Konishi. Selectivity for interaural time difference in the owl’s midbrain. J. Neurosci.,
6(12):3413–3422, 1986.
[18] J.A. Mazer. How the owl resolves auditory coding ambiguity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 95:10932–
10937, 1998.
[19] K. Saberi, Y. Takahashi, H. Farahbod, and M. Konishi. Neural bases of an auditory illusion and its
elimination in owls. Nature Neurosci., 2(7):656–659, 1999.
[20] E.I. Knudsen and M. Konishi. Mechanisms of sound localization in the barn owl (Tyto alba) measured
with the search coil technique. J. Comp. Phys. A, (133):13–21, 1979.
[21] Liam Paninski. Nonparametric inference of prior probabilities from Bayes-optimal behavior. In Y. Weiss,
B. Sch ¨olkopf, and J. Platt, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 18, pages 1067–
1074. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2006.
[22] Stocker A.A. and Simoncelli E.P. Noise characteristics and prior expectations in human visual speed
perception. Nature Neurosci., 9(4):578–585, 2006.
[23] E.I. Knudsen and M. Konishi. A neural map of auditory space in the owl. Science, 200:795–797, 1978.

8

