Loop Series and Bethe Variational Bounds
in Attractive Graphical Models

Erik B. Sudderth and Martin J. Wainwright
Electrical Engineering & Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley
sudderth@eecs.berkeley.edu, wainwrig@eecs.berkeley.edu

Alan S. Willsky
Electrical Engineering & Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
willsky@mit.edu

Abstract
Variational methods are frequently used to approximate or bound the partition
or likelihood function of a Markov random ﬁeld. Methods base d on mean ﬁeld
theory are guaranteed to provide lower bounds, whereas certain types of convex
relaxations provide upper bounds. In general, loopy belief propagation (BP) pro-
vides often accurate approximations, but not bounds. We prove that for a class of
attractive binary models, the so–called Bethe approximati on associated with any
ﬁxed point of loopy BP always lower bounds the true likelihoo d. Empirically,
this bound is much tighter than the naive mean ﬁeld bound, and requires no fur-
ther work than running BP. We establish these lower bounds using a loop series
expansion due to Chertkov and Chernyak, which we show can be derived as a
consequence of the tree reparameterization characterization of BP ﬁxed points.

1
Introduction
Graphical models are widely used in many areas, including statistical machine learning, computer
vision, bioinformatics, and communications. Such applications typically require computationally
efﬁcient methods for (approximately) solving various prob lems, including computing marginal dis-
tributions and likelihood functions. The variational framework provides a suite of candidate meth-
ods, including mean ﬁeld approximations [3, 9], the sum–pro
duct or belief propagation (BP) algo-
rithm [11, 14], Kikuchi and cluster variational methods [23], and related convex relaxations [21].

The likelihood or partition function of an undirected graphical model is of fundamental interest in
many contexts, including parameter estimation, error bounds in hypothesis testing, and combina-
torial enumeration. In rough terms, particular variational methods can be understood as solving
optimization problems whose optima approximate the log partition function. For mean ﬁeld meth-
ods, this optimal value is desirably guaranteed to lower bound the true likelihood [9]. For other
methods, including the Bethe variational problem underlying loopy BP [23], optima may either
over–estimate or under–estimate the truth. Although “conv
exi ﬁed” relaxations of the Bethe problem
yield upper bounds [21], to date the best known lower bounds on the partition function are based on
mean ﬁeld theory. Recent work has studied loop series expansions [2, 4] of the partition function,
which generate better approximations but not, in general, bounds.

Several existing theoretical results show that loopy BP, and the corresponding Bethe approximation,
have desirable properties for graphical models with long cycles [15] or sufﬁciently weak depen-
dencies [6, 7, 12, 19]. However, these results do not explain the excellent empirical performance
of BP in many graphs with short cycles, like the nearest –neig hbor grids arising in spatial statistics
and low–level vision [3, 18, 22]. Such models often encode “s moothness ” priors, and thus have
attractive interactions which encourage connected variables to share common values. The ﬁrst main
contribution of this paper is to demonstrate a family of attractive models for which the Bethe varia-
tional method always yields lower bounds on the true likelihood. Although we focus on models with
binary variables (but arbitrary order of interactions), we suspect that some ideas are more generally
applicable. For such models, these lower bounds are easily computed from any ﬁxed point of loopy
BP, and empirically improve substantially on naive mean ﬁel d bounds.

1

Our second main contribution lies in the route used to establish the Bethe lower bounds. In partic-
ular, Sec. 3 uses the reparameterization characterization of BP ﬁxed points [20] to provide a simple
derivation for the loop series expansion of Chertkov and Chernyak [2]. The Bethe approximation
is the ﬁrst term in this representation of the true partition function. Sec. 4 then identi ﬁes attrac-
tive models for which all terms in this expansion are positive, thus establishing the Bethe lower
bound. We conclude with empirical results demonstrating the accuracy of this bound, and discuss
implications for future analysis and applications of loopy BP.

p(x) =

p(x) =

ψst (xs , xt )

2 Undirected Graphical Models
Given an undirected graph G = (V , E ), with edges (s, t) ∈ E connecting n vertices s ∈ V , a graph-
ical model associates each node with a random variable Xs taking values xs ∈ X . For pairwise
(MRFs) as in Fig. 1, the joint distribution of x := {xs | s ∈ V } is speci ﬁed
Markov random ﬁelds
via a normalized product of local compatibility functions:
1
Z (ψ) Ys∈V
ψs (xs ) Y(s,t)∈E
The partition function Z (ψ) := Px∈X n Qs ψs (xs ) Q(s,t) ψst (xs , xt ), whose value depends on
the compatibilities ψ , is deﬁned so that p(x) is properly normalized. We also consider distributions
deﬁned by hypergraphs G = (V , C ), where each hyperedge c ∈ C connects some subset of the
vertices (c ⊂ V ). Letting xc := {xs | s ∈ c}, the corresponding joint distribution equals
1
Z (ψ) Ys∈V
ψs (xs ) Yc∈C
where as before Z (ψ) = Px∈X n Qs ψs (xs ) Qc ψc (xc ). Such higher–order random ﬁelds are
conveniently described by the bipartite factor graphs [11] of Fig. 2.
In statistical physics, the partition function arises in the study of how physical systems respond to
changes in external stimuli or temperature [23]. Alternatively, when compatibility functions are
parameterized by exponential families [20], log Z (ψ) is the family’s cumulant generating function,
and thus intrinsically related to the model’s marginal statistics. For directed Bayesian networks
(which can be factored as in eq. (2)), Z (ψ) is the marginal likelihood of observed data, and plays a
central role in learning and model selection [9]. However, for general graphs coupling discrete ran-
dom variables, the cost of exactly evaluating Z (ψ) grows exponentially with n [8]. Computationally
tractable families of bounds on the true partition function are thus of great practical interest.

ψc (xc )

(1)

(2)

2.1 Attractive Discrete Random Fields
In this paper, we focus on binary random vectors x ∈ {0, 1}n . We say that a pairwise MRF, with
compatibility functions ψst : {0, 1}2 → R+, has attractive interactions if
(3)
ψst (0, 0) ψst (1, 1) ≥ ψst (0, 1) ψst (1, 0)
for each edge (s, t) ∈ E . Intuitively, this condition requires all potentials to place greater weight
on conﬁgurations where neighboring variables take the same value. Our later analysis is based on
pairwise marginal distributions τst (xs , xt ), which we parameterize as follows:
τs := Eτst [Xs ]
τst (cid:21)
τst (xs , xt ) = (cid:20)1 − τs − τt + τst
τt − τst
τs − τst
τst := Eτst [XsXt ]
We let Eτst [·] denote expectation with respect to τst (xs , xt ), so that τst is the probability that
Xs = Xt = 1. This normalized matrix is attractive, satisfying eq. (3), if and only if τst ≥ τs τt .
For binary variables, the pairwise MRF of eq. (1) provides one representation of a general, inho-
mogeneous Ising model. In the statistical physics literature, Ising models are typically expressed
by coupling random spins zs ∈ {−1, +1} with symmetric potentials log ψst (zs , zt ) = θst zs zt . The
attractiveness condition of eq. (3) then becomes θst ≥ 0, and the resulting model has ferromagnetic
interactions. Furthermore, pairwise MRFs satisfy the regularity condition of [10], and thus allow
tractable MAP estimation via graph cuts [5], if and only if they are attractive. Even for attractive
models, however, calculation of the partition function in non–planar graphs is #P–complete [8].

(4)

To deﬁne families of higher–order attractive potentials, w e ﬁrst consider a probability distribution
τc (xc ) on k = |c| binary variables. Generalizing eq. (4), we parameterize such distributions by the

2

(5)

(6)

∅ 6= a ⊆ c

∅ 6= a ⊆ c

following collection of 2k − 1 mean parameters:
Xs(cid:21)
τa := Eτc(cid:20) Ys∈a
For example, τstu (xs , xt , xu ) would be parameterized by {τs , τt , τu , τst , τsu , τtu , τstu }. For any
subset a ⊆ c, we then deﬁne the following central moment statistic:
κa := Eτc(cid:20) Ys∈a
(Xs − τs )(cid:21)
Note that κs = 0, while κst = Covτ (Xs , Xt ) = τst − τs τt . The third–order central moment then
equals the cumulant κstu = τstu − τst τu − τsu τt − τtu τs + 2τs τt τu .
Given these deﬁnitions, we say that a probability distribut
ion τc (xc ) is attractive if the central mo-
ments associated with all subsets a ⊆ c of binary variables are non–negative ( κa ≥ 0). Similarly, a
compatibility function ψc (xc ) is attractive if the probability distribution attained by normalizing its
values has non–negative central moments. For example, the f ollowing potential is easily shown to
satisfy this condition for all degrees k = |c|, and any scalar θc > 0:
x1 = x2 = · · · = xk
log ψc (x1 , . . . , xk ) = (cid:26) θc
otherwise
−θc
2.2 Belief Propagation and the Bethe Variational Principle
Many applications of graphical models require estimates of the posterior marginal distributions of
individual variables τs (xs ) or factors τc (xc ). Loopy belief propagation (BP) approximates these
marginals via a series of messages passed among nodes of the graphical model [14, 23]. Let Γ(s)
denote the set of factors which depend on Xs , or equivalently the neighbors of node s in the corre-
sponding factor graph. The BP algorithm then iterates the following message updates:
ψc (xc ) Yt∈c\s
¯msc (xs ) ← ψs (xs ) Yd∈Γ(s)\c
mcs (xs ) ← Xxc\s
The left –hand expression updates the message ¯msc (xs ) passed from variable node s to factor c. New
outgoing messages mcs (xs ) from factor c to each s ∈ c are then determined by marginalizing the
incoming messages from other nodes. At any iteration, appropriately normalized products of these
messages deﬁne estimates of the desired marginals:
τs (xs ) ∝ ψs (xs ) Yc∈Γ(s)
τc (xc ) ∝ ψc (xc ) Yt∈c
In tree–structured graphs, BP deﬁnes a dynamic programming
recursion which converges to the
exact marginals after ﬁnitely many iterations [11, 14]. In g raphs with cycles, however, convergence
is not guaranteed, and pseudo–marginals computed via eq. (9) are (often good) approximations.

mds (xs )

mcs (xs )

¯mtc (xt )

(8)

(7)

¯mtc (xt )

(9)

τc (xc ) log ψc (xc )

A wide range of inference algorithms can be derived via variational approximations [9] to the true
partition function. Loopy BP is implicitly associated with the following Bethe approximation:
τs (xs ) log ψs (xs ) + Xc∈C Xxc
log Zβ (ψ ; τ ) = Xs∈V Xxs
τc (xc )
τs (xs ) log τs (xs ) − Xc∈C Xxc
− Xs∈V Xxs
τc (xc ) log
Qt∈c τt (xt )
Fixed points of loopy BP correspond to stationary points of this Bethe approximation [23], subject
to the local marginalization constraints Pxc\s
τc (xc ) = τs (xs ).
3 Reparameterization and Loop Series Expansions
As discussed in Sec. 2.2, any BP ﬁxed point is in one–to–one co
rrespondence with a set {τs , τc }
of pseudo–marginals associated with each of the graph’s nod es s ∈ V and factors c ∈ C . These
pseudo–marginals then lead to an alternative parameterization [20] of the factor graph of eq. (2):
1
τc (xc )
Z (τ ) Ys∈V
τs (xs ) Yc∈C
Qt∈c τt (xt )
For pairwise MRFs, the reparameterized compatibility functions equal τst (xs , xt )/τs (xs )τt (xt ).
The BP algorithm effectively searches for reparameterizations which are tree–consistent , so that

p(x) =

(10)

(11)

3

τc (xc ) is the exact marginal distribution of Xc for any tree (or forest) embedded in the original
graph [20]. In later sections, we take expectations with respect to τc (xc ) of functions f (xc ) de-
ﬁned over individual factors. Although these pseudo–margi
nals will in general not equal the true
marginals pc (xc ), BP ﬁxed points ensure local consistency so that Eτc [f (Xc )] is well –deﬁned.
Using eq. (10), it is easily shown that the Bethe approximation Zβ (τ ; τ ) = 1 for any joint distribu-
tion deﬁned by reparameterized potentials as in eq. (11). Fo r simplicity, the remainder of this paper
focuses on reparameterized models of this form, and analyzes properties of the corresponding exact
partition function Z (τ ). The resulting expansions and bounds are then related to the original MRF’s
partition function via the positive constant Z (ψ)/Z (τ ) = Zβ (ψ ; τ ) of eq. (10).
Recently, Chertkov and Chernyak proposed a ﬁnite loop series expansion [2] of the partition func-
tion, whose ﬁrst term coincides with the Bethe approximatio n. They provide two derivations: one
applies a trigonometric identity to Fourier representations of binary variables, while the second em-
ploys a saddle point approximation obtained via an auxiliary ﬁeld of complex variables. The gauge
transformations underlying these derivations are a type of reparameterization, but their form is com-
plicated by auxiliary variables and extraneous degrees of freedom. In this section, we show that the
ﬁxed point characterization of eq. (11) leads to a more direc t, and arguably simpler, derivation.

βst

(12)

3.1 Pairwise Loop Series Expansions
We begin by developing a loop series expansion for pairwise MRFs. Given an undirected graph
G = (V , E ), and some subset F ⊆ E of the graph’s edges, let ds (F ) denote the degree (number of
neighbors) of node s in the subgraph induced by F . As illustrated in Fig. 1, any subset F for which
all nodes s ∈ V have degree ds (F ) 6= 1 deﬁnes a generalized loop [2]. The partition function for
any binary, pairwise MRF can then be expanded via an associated set of loop corrections.
Proposition 1. Consider a pairwise MRF deﬁned on an undirected G = (V , E ), with reparameter-
ized potentials as in eq. (11). The associated partition function then equals
Eτs h(Xs − τs )ds (F ) i
Z (τ ) = 1 + X∅ 6=F ⊆E
βF := Y(s,t)∈F
βF Ys∈V
τst − τs τt
Covτst (Xs , Xt )
βst :=
τs (1 − τs )τt (1 − τt )
Varτs (Xs ) Varτt (Xt )
(12), and
where only generalized loops F lead to non–zero terms in the sum of eq.
Eτs (cid:2)(Xs − τs )d (cid:3) = τs (1 − τs ) (cid:2)(1 − τs )d−1 + (−1)d (τs )d−1 (cid:3)
are central moments of the binary variables at individual nodes.
Proof. To establish the expansion of eq. (12), we exploit the following polynomial representation of
reparameterized pairwise compatibility functions:
τst (xs , xt )
τs (xs )τt (xt )
(xs , xt ) ∈ {0, 1}2 if βst is deﬁned as in
As veri ﬁed in [17], this expression is satis ﬁed for any
eq. (13). For attractive models satisfying eq. (3), βst ≥ 0 for all edges. Using E ˜τ [·] to denote
expectation with respect to the fully factorized distribution ˜τ (x) = Qs τs (xs ), we then have
τst (xs , xt )
Z (τ ) = Xx∈{0,1}n Ys∈V
τs (xs ) Y(s,t)∈E
τs (xs )τt (xt )
= E ˜τ(cid:20) Y(s,t)∈E
τs (Xs )τt (Xt ) (cid:21) = E ˜τ(cid:20) Y(s,t)∈E
1 + βst (Xs − τs )(Xt − τt )(cid:21)
τst (Xs , Xt )
Expanding this polynomial via the expectation operator’s linearity, we recover one term for each
non–empty subset F ⊆ E of the graph’s edges:
E ˜τ(cid:20) Y(s,t)∈F
βst (Xs − τs )(Xt − τt )(cid:21)
Z (τ ) = 1 + X∅ 6=F ⊆E
The expression in eq. (12) then follows from the independence structure of ˜τ (x), and standard
formulas for the moments of Bernoulli random variables. To evaluate these terms, note that if
ds (F ) = 1, it follows that Eτs [Xs − τs ] = 0. There is thus one loop correction for each generalized
loop F , in which all connected nodes have degree at least two.

= 1 + βst (xs − τs )(xt − τt )

(16)

(17)

(13)

(14)

(15)

=

4

Figure 1: A pairwise MRF coupling ten binary variables (left), and the nine generalized loops in its loop series
expansion (right). For attractive potentials, two of the generalized loops may have negative signs (second &
third from right), while the core graph of Thm. 1 contains eight variables (far right).

Figure 1 illustrates the set of generalized loops associated with a particular pairwise MRF. These
loops effectively deﬁne corrections to the Bethe estimate Z (τ ) ≈ 1 of the partition function for
reparameterized models. Tree–structured graphs do not con tain any non–trivial generalized loops,
and the Bethe variational approximation is thus exact.

The loop expansion formulas of [2] can be precisely recovered by transforming binary variables to
a spin representation, and refactoring terms from the denominator of edge weights βst to adjacent
vertices. Explicit computation of these loop corrections is in general intractable; for example, fully
connected graphs with n ≥ 5 nodes have more than 2n generalized loops. In some cases, accounting
for a small set of signi ﬁcant loop corrections may lead to imp roved approximations to Z (ψ) [4], or
more accurate belief estimates for LDPC codes [1]. We instead use the series expansion of Prop. 1
to establish analytic properties of BP ﬁxed points.

βac (F )

(18)

βa :=

βF := Yc∈C

3.2 Factor Graph Loop Series Expansions
We now extend the loop series expansion to higher–order MRFs deﬁned on hypergraphs G = (V , C ).
Let E = {(s, c) | c ∈ C, s ∈ c} denote the set of edges in the factor graph representation of this
MRF. As illustrated in Fig. 2, we deﬁne a generalized loop to b e a subset F ⊆ E of edges such that
all connected factor and variable nodes have degree at least two.
Proposition 2. Consider any factor graph G = (V , C ) with reparameterized potentials as in
eq. (11), and associated edges E . The partition function then equals
Eτs h(Xs − τs )ds (F ) i
Z (τ ) = 1 + X∅ 6=F ⊆E
βF Ys∈V
Eτc (cid:2)Qs∈a (Xs − τs )(cid:3)
κa
Qt∈a τt (1 − τt )
Qt∈a Varτt (Xt )
where ac (F ) := {s ∈ c | (s, c) ∈ F } denotes the subset of variables linked to factor node c by the
(18).
edges in F . Only generalized loops F lead to non–zero terms in the sum of eq.
Proof. As before, we employ a polynomial representation of the reparameterized factors in eq. (11):
τc (xc )
= 1 + Xa⊆c,|a|≥2
βa Ys∈a
(xs − τs )
Qt∈c τt (xt )
For factor graphs with attractive reparameterized potentials, the constant βa ≥ 0 for all a ⊆ c.
Note that this representation, which is derived in [17], reduces to that of eq. (15) when c = {s, t}.
Single–variable subsets are excluded in eq. (20) because κs = Eτs [Xs − τs ] = 0.
Applying eq. (20) as in our earlier derivation for pairwise MRFs (see eq. (16)), we may express the
partition function of the reparameterized factor graph as follows:
Z (τ ) = E ˜τ(cid:20) Yc∈C
Qt∈c τt (Xt ) (cid:21) = E ˜τ(cid:20) Yc∈C
(Xs − τs )(cid:21)
τc (Xc )
1 + X∅ 6=a⊆c
βa Ys∈a
Note that βa = 0 for any subset where |a| = 1. There is then a one–to–one correspondence between
variable node subsets a ⊆ c, and subsets {(s, c) | s ∈ a} of the factor graph’s edges E . Expanding
this expression by F ⊆ E , it follows that each factor c ∈ C contributes a term corresponding to the
chosen subset ac (F ) of its edges:
E ˜τ(cid:20) Yc∈C
(Xs − τs )(cid:21)
βac (F ) Ys∈ac (F )
Z (τ ) = 1 + X∅ 6=F ⊆E
Note that β∅ = 1. Equation (18) then follows from the independence properties of ˜τ (x). For a term
in this loop series to be non–zero, there must be no degree one variables, since Eτs [Xs − τs ] = 0.
In addition, the deﬁnition of βa implies that there can be no degree one factor nodes.

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

=

5

Figure 2: A factor graph (left) with three binary variables (circles) and four factor nodes (squares), and the
thirteen generalized loops in its loop series expansion (right, along with the full graph).

4 Lower Bounds in Attractive Binary Models
The Bethe approximation underlying loopy BP differs from mean ﬁeld methods [9], which lower
bound the true log partition function Z (ψ), in two key ways. First, while the Bethe entropy (second
line of eq. (10)) is exact for tree–structured graphs, it approximates (rather than bounds) the true
entropy in graphs with cycles. Second, the marginalization condition imposed by loopy BP relaxes
(rather than strengthens) the global constraints characterizing valid distributions [21]. Neverthe-
less, we now show that for a large family of attractive graphical models, the Bethe approximation
Zβ (ψ ; τ ) of eq. (10) lower bounds Z (ψ). In contrast with mean ﬁeld methods, these bounds hold
only at appropriate BP ﬁxed points, not for arbitrarily chosen pseudo–marginals τc (xc ).

4.1 Partition Function Bounds for Pairwise Graphical Models
Consider a pairwise MRF deﬁned on G = (V , E ), as in eq. (1). Let VH ⊆ V denote the set of
nodes which either belong to some cycle in G, or lie on a path (sequence of edges) connecting two
cycles. We then deﬁne the core graph H = (VH , EH ) as the node–induced subgraph obtained by
discarding edges from nodes outside VH , so that EH = {(s, t) ∈ E | s, t ∈ VH }. The unique core
graph H underlying any graph G can be efﬁciently constructed by iteratively pruning degre e one
nodes, or leaves, until all remaining nodes have two or more neighbors. The following theorem
identi ﬁes conditions under which all terms in the loop serie s expansion must be non–negative.
Theorem 1. Let H = (VH , EH ) be the core graph for a pairwise binary MRF, with attractive
potentials satisfying eq. (3). Consider any BP ﬁxed point for which all nodes s ∈ VH with three or
more neighbors in H have marginals τs ≤ 1
2 (or equivalently, τs ≥ 1
2 ). The corresponding Bethe
variational approximation Zβ (ψ ; τ ) then lower bounds the true partition function Z (ψ).

Proof. It is sufﬁcient to show that Z (τ ) ≥ 1 for any reparameterized pairwise MRF, as in eq. (11).
From eq. (9), note that loopy BP estimates the pseudo–margin al τst (xs , xt ) via the product of
ψst (xs , xt ) with message functions of single variables. For this reason, attractive pairwise com-
patibilities always lead to BP ﬁxed points with attractive p seudo–marginals satisfying τst ≥ τs τt .
Consider the pairwise loop series expansion of eq. (12). As shown by eq. (13), attractive models
lead to edge weights βst ≥ 0. It is thus sufﬁcient to show that Qs
Eτs (cid:2)(Xs − τs )ds (F ) (cid:3) ≥ 0 for
each generalized loop F ⊆ E . Suppose ﬁrst that the graph has a single cycle, and thus exac tly one
non–zero generalized loop F . Because all connected nodes in this cycle have degree two, the bound
follows because Eτs (cid:2)(Xs − τs )2 (cid:3) ≥ 0. More generally, we clearly have Z (τ ) ≥ 1 in graphs where
every generalized loop F associates an even number of neighbors ds (F ) with each node.
Focusing on generalized loops containing nodes with odd degree d ≥ 3, eq. (14) implies that
Eτs (cid:2)(Xs − τs )d (cid:3) ≥ 0 for marginals satisfying 1 − τs ≥ τs . For BP ﬁxed points in which τs ≤ 1
2
for all nodes, we thus have Z (τ ) ≥ 1. In particular, the symmetric ﬁxed point τs = 1
2 leads to uni-
formly positive generalized loop corrections. More generally, the marginals of nodes s for which
ds (F ) ≤ 2 for every generalized loop F do not inﬂuence the expansion’s positivity. Theorem 1
discards these nodes by examining the topology of the core graph H (see Fig. 1 for an example).
For ﬁxed points where τs ≥ 1
2 for all nodes, we rewrite the polynomial in the loop expansion of
eq. (15) as (1 + βst (τs − xs )(τt − xt )), and employ an analogous line of reasoning.
In addition to establishing Thm. 1, our arguments show that the true partition function monotonically
increases as additional edges, with attractive reparameterized potentials as in eq. (11), are added to
τs ≤ 1
2 . For such models, the accumulation of particular
a graph with ﬁxed pseudo–marginals
loop corrections, as explored by [4], produces a sequence of increasingly tight bounds on Z (ψ). In
addition, we note that the conditions required by Thm. 1 are similar to those underlying classical

6

Indeed, the Grifﬁths –Kelly–
correlation inequalities [16] from the statistical physics literature.
Sherman (GKS) inequality leads to an alternative proof in cases where τs = 1
2 for all nodes.
For attractive Ising models in which some nodes have marginals τs > 1
2 and others τt < 1
2 , the loop
series expansion may contain negative terms. For small graphs like that in Fig. 1, it is possible to
use upper bounds on the edge weights βst , which follow from τst ≤ min(τs , τt ), to cancel negative
loop corrections with larger positive terms. As conﬁrmed by the empirical results in Sec. 4.3, the
lower bound Z (ψ) ≥ Zβ (ψ ; τ ) thus continues to hold for many (perhaps all) attractive Ising models
with less homogeneous marginal biases.

4.2 Partition Function Bounds for Factor Graphs
Given a factor graph G = (V , C ) relating binary variables, deﬁne a core graph H = (VH , CH ) by
excluding variable and factor nodes which are not members of any generalized loops. As in Sec. 2.2,
let Γ(s) denote the set of factor nodes neighboring variable node s in the core graph H .
Theorem 2. Let H = (VH , CH ) be the core graph for a binary factor graph, and consider an
attractive BP ﬁxed point for which one of the following condi tions holds:
(i) τs ≤ 1
2 for all nodes s ∈ VH with |Γ(s)| ≥ 3, and κa ≥ 0 for all a ⊆ c, c ∈ CH .
(ii) τs ≥ 1
2 for all nodes s ∈ VH with |Γ(s)| ≥ 3, and (−1)|a|κa ≥ 0 for all a ⊆ c, c ∈ CH .
The Bethe approximation Zβ (ψ ; τ ) then lower bounds the true partition function Z (ψ).

For the case where τs ≤ 1
2 , the proof of this theorem is a straightforward generalization of the
arguments in Sec. 4.1. When τs ≥ 1
2 , we replace all (xs − τs ) terms by (τs − xs ) in the expansion
of eq. (20), and again recover uniformly positive loop corrections.

For any given BP ﬁxed point, the conditions of Thm. 2 are easy t o verify. For factor graphs, it is
more challenging to determine which compatibility functions ψc (xc ) necessarily lead to attractive
ﬁxed points. For symmetric potentials as in eq. (7), however , one can show that the conditions on
κa , a ⊆ c are necessarily satis ﬁed whenever all variable nodes s ∈ VH have the same bias.

4.3 Empirical Comparison of Mean Field and Bethe Lower Bounds
In this section, we compare the accuracy of the Bethe variational bounds established by Thm. 1
to those produced by a naive, fully factored mean ﬁeld approx imation [3, 9]. Using the
spin representation zs ∈ {−1, +1}, we examine Ising models with attractive pairwise potentials
log ψst (zs , zt ) = θst zs zt of varying strengths θst ≥ 0. We ﬁrst examine a 2D torus, with potentials
of uniform strength θst = ¯θ and no local observations. For such MRFs, the exact partition func-
tion may be computed via Onsager’s classical eigenvector method [13]. As shown in Fig. 3(a), for
moderate ¯θ the Bethe bound Zβ (ψ ; τ ) is substantially tighter than mean ﬁeld. For large ¯θ , only two
ty, so that Z (ψ) ≈ 2 exp( ¯θ |E |). In this
states (all spins “up” or “down”) have signi ﬁcant probabili
regime, loopy BP exhibits “symmetry breaking” [6], and conv erges to one of these states at random
with corresponding bound Zβ (ψ ; τ ) ≈ exp( ¯θ |E |). As veri ﬁed in Fig. 3(a), as ¯θ → ∞ the difference
log Z (ψ) − log Zβ (ψ ; τ ) ≈ log 2 ≈ 0.69 thus remains bounded.
We also consider a set of random 10 × 10 nearest –neighbor grids, with inhomogeneous pairwise
potentials sampled according to |θst | ∼ N (cid:0)0, ¯θ 2 (cid:1), and observation potentials log ψs (zs ) = θs zs ,
|θs | ∼ N (cid:0)0, 0.12 (cid:1). For each candidate ¯θ , we sample 100 random MRFs, and plot the average differ-
ence log Zβ (ψ ; τ ) − log Z (ψ) between the true partition function and the BP (or mean ﬁeld)
ﬁxed
point reached from a random initialization. Fig. 3(b) ﬁrst c onsiders MRFs where θs > 0 for all
nodes, so that the conditions of Thm. 1 are satis ﬁed for all BP ﬁxed points. For these models, the
Bethe bound is extremely accurate.
In Fig. 3(c), we also consider MRFs where the observation
potentials θs are of mixed signs. Although this sometimes leads to BP ﬁxed p oints with negative
associated loop corrections, the Bethe variational approximation nevertheless always lower bounds
the true partition function in these examples. We hypothesize that this bound in fact holds for all
attractive, binary pairwise MRFs, regardless of the observation potentials.
5 Discussion
We have provided an alternative, direct derivation of the partition function’s loop series expansion,
based on the reparameterization characterization of BP ﬁxe d points. We use this expansion to prove
that the Bethe approximation lower bounds the true partition function in a family of binary attractive

7

 

0.5

0

−0.5

−1

−1.5

−2

n
o
i
t
i
t
r
a
P
 
g
o
L
 
e
u
r
T
 
m
o
r
f
 
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
f
i
D

 

2

0

−2

−4

−6

n
o
i
t
i
t
r
a
P
 
g
o
L
 
e
u
r
T
 
m
o
r
f
 
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
f
i
D

 

10

0

−10

−20

−30

−40

−50

n
o
i
t
i
t
r
a
P
 
g
o
L
 
e
u
r
T
 
m
o
r
f
 
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
f
i
D

−2.5

−3

 
0

1

−60

 
0

0.2

−70

Belief Propagation
Belief Propagation
Belief Propagation
Mean Field
Mean Field
Mean Field
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.4
0.6
0.8
Edge Strength
Edge Strength
Edge Strength
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3: Bethe (dark blue, top) and naive mean ﬁeld (light green, bottom) lower b ounds on log Z (ψ) for three
families of attractive, pairwise Ising models. (a) 30 × 30 torus with no local observations and homogeneous
potentials. (b) 10 × 10 grid with random, inhomogeneous potentials and all pseudo–marginals τs > 1
2 , satisfy-
ing the conditions of Thm. 1. (c) 10 × 10 grid with random, inhomogeneous potentials and pseudo–marginals
of mixed biases. Empirically, the Bethe lower bound also holds for these models.

−8

 
0

0.2

0.2

1

1

models. These results have potential implications for the suitability of loopy BP in approximate
parameter estimation [3], as well as its convergence dynamics. We are currently exploring general-
izations of our results to other families of attractive, or “ nearly” attractive, graphical models.
Acknowledgments The authors thank Yair Weiss for suggesting connections to loop series expansions,
and helpful conversations. Funding provided by Army Research Ofﬁ ce Grant W911NF-05-1-0207, National
Science Foundation Grant DMS-0528488, and NSF Career Grant CCF-0545862.
References
[1] M. Chertkov and V. Y. Chernyak. Loop calculus helps to improve belief propagation and linear program-
ming decodings of low density parity check codes. In Allerton Conf., 2006.
[2] M. Chertkov and V. Y. Chernyak. Loop series for discrete statistical models on graphs. J. Stat. Mech.,
2006:P06009, June 2006.
[3] B. J. Frey and N. Jojic. A comparison of algorithms for inference and learning in probabilistic graphical
models. IEEE Trans. PAMI, 27(9):1392–1416, Sept. 2005.
[4] V. G ´omez, J. M. Mooij, and H. J. Kappen. Truncating the loop series expansion for BP. JMLR, 8:1987–
2016, 2007.
[5] D. M. Greig, B. T. Porteous, and A. H. Seheult. Exact maximum a posteriori estimation for binary images.
J. R. Stat. Soc. B, 51(2):271–279, 1989.
[6] T. Heskes. On the uniqueness of loopy belief propagation ﬁxed poin ts. Neural Comp., 16:2379–2413,
2004.
[7] A. T. Ihler, J. W. Fisher, and A. S. Willsky. Loopy belief propagation: Convergence and effects of message
errors. JMLR, 6:905–936, 2005.
[8] M. Jerrum and A. Sinclair. Polynomial-time approximation algorithms for the Ising model. SIAM J.
Comput., 22(5):1087–1116, Oct. 1993.
[9] M. I. Jordan, Z. Ghahramani, T. S. Jaakkola, and L. K. Saul. An introduction to variational methods for
graphical models. Machine Learning, 37:183–233, 1999.
[10] V. Kolmogorov and R. Zabih. What energy functions can be minimized via graph cuts? IEEE Trans.
PAMI, 26(2):147–159, Feb. 2004.
[11] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger. Factor graphs and the sum–product algorithm.
Trans. IT, 47(2):498–519, Feb. 2001.
[12] J. M. Mooij and H. J. Kappen. Sufﬁcient conditions for converg ence of loopy belief propagation. In UAI
21, pages 396–403. AUAI Press, 2005.
[13] L. Onsager. Crystal statistics I: A two–dimensional model with an or der–disorder transition. Physical
Review, 65:117–149, 1944.
[14] J. Pearl. Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems. Morgan Kaufman, San Mateo, 1988.
[15] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke. The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-
passing decoding. IEEE Trans. IT, 47(2):599–618, Feb. 2001.
[16] S. B. Shlosman. Correlation inequalities and their applications. J. Math. Sci., 15(2):79–101, Jan. 1981.
[17] E. B. Sudderth, M. J. Wainwright, and A. S. Willsky. Loop series and Bethe variational bounds in attractive
graphical models. UC Berkeley, EECS department technical report, in preparation, 2008.
[18] M. F. Tappen and W. T. Freeman. Comparison of graph cuts with belief propagation for stereo, using
identical MRF parameters. In ICCV, volume 2, pages 900–907, 2003.
[19] S. C. Tatikonda and M. I. Jordan. Loopy belief propagation and Gibbs measures.
493–500. Morgan Kaufmann, 2002.
[20] M. J. Wainwright, T. S. Jaakkola, and A. S. Willsky. Tree–based r eparameterization framework for anal-
ysis of sum–product and related algorithms.
IEEE Trans. IT, 49(5):1120–1146, May 2003.
[21] M. J. Wainwright, T. S. Jaakkola, and A. S. Willsky. A new class of upper bounds on the log partition
function. IEEE Trans. IT, 51(7):2313–2335, July 2005.
[22] Y. Weiss. Comparing the mean ﬁeld method and belief propagation fo r approximate inference in MRFs.
In D. Saad and M. Opper, editors, Advanced Mean Field Methods. MIT Press, 2001.
[23] J. S. Yedidia, W. T. Freeman, and Y. Weiss. Constructing free energy approximations and generalized
belief propagation algorithms. IEEE Trans. IT, 51(7):2282–2312, July 2005.

In UAI 18, pages

IEEE

8

