 

 

L e a r n i n g   t o   u s e  Wo r k i n g  M em o r y   i n   P a r t i a l l y  
O b s e r v a b l e   E n v i r o nm e n t s   t h r o u g h  
D o p am i n e r g i c   R e i n f o r c em e n t  

Michael T.  Todd ,  Yael Niv,  Jonathan  D . Cohen 
Department of  Psychology & Princeton  Neuroscience Institute  
Princeton  University, Princeton ,  NJ 08544 
{mttodd ,yael,jdc}@princeton .edu 

Abstract 
Working  memory  is  a  central  topic  of  cognitive  neuroscience  because  it  is  
critica l  for  solving   real-world   problems  in  which   information   from mu ltiple  
temporally  distant  sources   must  be   comb ined  to  generate  appropriate 
behavior.   However,   an   often   neglected   fact  is  that  learning   to   use   working 
memory  effec tively  is  itself   a  difficult  problem.  The  Gating   framework  [1-
4]  is  a   collection   of  psychological  models  that  show  how   dopamine   can 
train  the  basal ganglia and  prefrontal cortex  to  form useful working memory  
representations  in   certain   types  of  problems. We  unite Gating  with  machine  
learning   theory  concerning   the   general  problem  of   memory-based   optimal  
control  [5-6].  We  present  a  normative  model  that  learns ,   by  online   temporal  
difference   me thods ,   to  use   working  memory  to   maximize   discounted  future 
reward   in   partia lly  observable  settings.  The  model  successfully  solves  a 
benchmark   working   memory  problem,   and   exhibits  limitations   similar   to  
those  observed   in  humans .  Our purpose   is  to   introduce a  concise, normative 
definition   of  high  level  cognitive  concepts  such  as  working  memory  and 
cognitive control in terms of maximizing discounted future rewards.  
1  
I n t r o d u c t i o n  
Working   memory   is   loosely  defined   in   cognitive  neuroscience  as  informa tion   that  is   (1) 
internally ma intained   on  a  temporary  or   short  term  basis,  and   (2)  required   for  tasks  in  which 
immediate   observations   cannot  be  mapped  to   correct  actions .   It  is  widely  assumed   that  
prefrontal cortex   (PFC)  plays  a   role  in  maintaining  and  updating  working  memory.  However, 
relatively  little   is  known   about  how   PFC  develops  useful  working  memory  representations  
for  a new  task.  Furthermore ,  current work focuses  on describing   the  structure  and   limitations  
of   working  memory,   but  does   not  ask   why,   or   in   what  general  class   of   tasks ,   is  it  necessary.  
Borrowing  from  the   theory  of   optima l   control  in   partially  observable   Markov   decision 
problems  (POMDPs) ,  we   frame  the  psychological  concept of working  memory  as   an   internal 
state   representation ,   developed   and   emp loyed   to   maximize   future   reward   in   partially  
observable   environments.   We  combine   computational 
insights  from  POMDPs   and  
neurobiologically  plausible  models  from  cognitive  neuroscience  to   suggest  a  simple  
reinforcement   learning   (RL)   model  of   working   memory  function   that  can   be   imp lemented  
through dopaminergic train ing  of  the  basal ganglia and PFC.    
The  Gating   framework   is  a   series  of   cognitive  neuroscience  models  developed   to   explain  
how  dopaminergic  RL  signals   can   shape   useful  working  memory  representations   [1-4].  
Computationally  
this   framework   models  working  memory  as   a  collection   of   past 
observations,  each  of  which  can  occasionally  be  replaced  with  the  current  observation,  and  
addresses   the   problem  of   learning   when   to   update  each  memory  e lement  versus  maintaining 
it.  In   the  original  Gating   model  [1-2]  the  PFC  contained   a  unitary  working  memory  

representation  that  was  updated  whenever  a  phasic  dopamine  (DA)   burst   occurred  (e.g .,  due 
to   unexpected  reward  or  novelty) . That  model  was  the  first  to   connect  working memory  and 
RL  via   the   temporal  difference   (TD)   model  of   DA  firing   [7-8],   and   thus   to   suggest  how  
working   memory  might  serve   a   normative   purpose.   However,   that  model  had   limited  
computa tional   flexibility  due  to   the  unitary  nature  of   the  working   memory  ( i.e.,  a  single-
observation memory  controlled  by  a  sca lar  DA  signal). More  recent work  [3-4]  has  partially 
repositioned   the  Gating   framework   within   the Actor/Critic  model  of   mesostria tal   RL  [9-10], 
positing   memory  updating   as   but  another   cortical  action   controlled   by  the   dorsal  striatal  
"actor."  This  architecture  increased  computational  flexibility  by  introducing   multiple  
working   memory  elements,   corresponding   to   multiple   corticostriata l  loops ,   that  could   be  
quasi-independently  updated .   However,  that  model  combined   a   number   of   components  
(including  supervised  and   unsupervised   learning ,   and  complex   neural  network  dynamics) , 
making   it  difficult  to   understand   the  relationship   between   simple  RL  mechanisms  and  
working  memory  function.  Moreover,   because  the  model  used  the  Rescorla-Wagner-like  
PVLV  algorithm  [4]  ra ther   than   TD   [7-8]  as  the  model  of   phasic  DA  bursts,  the  model 's  
behavior   and  working   memory  representations  were  not  directly  shaped   by  standard 
normative  criteria for  RL models (i.e . ,  discounted  future reward or reward  per  unit time) .  
We  present  a  new  Gating   model,  synthesizing   the  mesostriatal  Actor/Critic  arch itec ture  of  
[4]  with   a   norma tive   POMDP  framework,   and   reducing   the   Gating   model  to   a   four-
parame ter,   pure   RL  model  in   the   process.   This  produces   a   model  very  similar   to   previous  
machine   learning  work  on  "model-free"  approximate POMDP solvers  [5 ,6], which attemp t  to  
form  good   solutions   without  explicit  knowledge   of   the  environment 's   structure   or  dynamics .  
That  is,  we  model  working  memory  as   a  discrete  memory  system  (a  collection  of  recent 
observations) rather  than a continuous "belief state" (an  inferred probability distribution  over 
hidden   states) .   In   some  environments  this  may  permit  only  an   approxima te   solution . 
However,   the   strength   of   such   a   system  is   that  it  requires   very  little  prior   knowledge ,   and   is 
thus   potentially  useful  for   animals ,   who  must  learn   effective   behavior  and   memory-
management  policies  in   comp letely   novel  environments  (i.e.,  in   the  absence  of  a  “world  
model”). Therefore, we  retain  the computational  flexibility of  the more  recent Gating models  
[3-4], while re-establishing  the goal of  defining  working memory  in  norma tive terms [1-2].   
with  an  eligibility  trace  (i.e.,  TD(𝜆)  with  0 < < 1),  the  model  can  achieve  optima l 
To   illustrate  the  strengths  and   limitations  of   the  model,  we  apply  it  to   two   representative 
working-memory  tasks .   The  first  is  the   12-AX   task   proposed   as   a   Gating   benchmark   in   [4].  
Contrary  to  previous claims  that TD  learning   is not sufficient  to  solve this  task , we show  that 
behavior.  The  second  task  highlights  important limita tions  of  the  model.  Since  our  model  is a  
POMDP  solver   and   POMDPs  are,  in  general,  intractable   (i.e.,  solution  algorithms  require  an  
infeasible number of   computations),  it  is   clear  that our  model must ultima tely  fail  to   achieve 
optimal  performance   as   environments  increase  even  to  moderate   complexity.  However, 
human   working  memory  also   exhibits  sharp   limitations. We  apply  our  model  to   an   implicit 
artificial  grammar   learning   task   [11]  and   show   that  it  indeed   fails  in   ways  reminiscent  of  
human   performance.  Moreover,  simulating   this  task  with   increased   working  memory 
capacity  reveals  diminishing  returns  as  capacity  increases  beyond  a  sma ll  number,  
suggesting   that  the   "magic   number"   limited  working  memory   capacity   found   in   humans   [12] 
might in  fact be  optima l from a  learning  standpoint. 
   
2  
M o d e l  A r c h i t e c t u r e  
As  with  working  memory  tasks,  a  POMDP  does  not  admit  an   optima l  behavior  policy  based  
only  on   the   current  observation .   Instead ,   the   optimal  policy  generally  depends   on   some  
combina tion   of   memory  as   well  as  the  current  observation .   Although   the  type  of   memory  
required  varies  across POMDPs,  in  certain  cases  a  finite memory  sys tem  is  a  sufficient  basis 
for   an   optimal  policy.   Peshkin ,   Meuleau ,   and   Kaelbling  [6]  used  an  ex ternal  finite   memory 
device   (e .g . ,   a   shopping   list)   to   improve   the   performance   of   RL  in   a   model-free   POMDP 
setting .  Their  model 's   "state"   variable  consisted   of   the   current  observation   augmented   by  the  
memory  device. An  augmented  action  space,  consisting  of  both  memory  actions  and  motor 
actions,  allowed   the  model  to   learn   effective  memory-management  and  motor  policies  
simultaneously. We  integrate  this  approach   with   the  Gating   model,  altering   the  semantics  so  
that 
the  external  memory  device  becomes 
internal  working  memory 
(presumed  

    ∀ 𝑠, 𝑎  

Choose motor action, 𝑎(cid:3047) , and gating action, 𝑔(cid:3047) , for 
𝑎(cid:3047) ← Softmax(𝑢; 𝑠(cid:3047) ) 
current state, 𝑠(cid:3047)  according to softmax over motor and 
𝑔(cid:3047) ← Softmax(𝑣 ; 𝑠(cid:3047) ) 
gating action preferences, 𝑢  and 𝑣 , respectively. 
 
𝑒(cid:3014) (𝑠, 𝑎) ← (cid:4688)1 − Pr(𝑎|𝑠) , 𝑠 = 𝑠(cid:3047) , 𝑎 = 𝑎(cid:3047)
Update motor and gating action eligibility traces, 𝑒(cid:3014)  
− Pr(𝑎|𝑠) , 𝑠 = 𝑠(cid:3047) , 𝑎 ≠ 𝑎(cid:3047)
and 𝑒 (cid:3008) , respectively. (Update shown for motor action 
𝛾𝜆𝑒(cid:3014) (𝑠 , 𝑎), 𝑠 ≠ 𝑠(cid:3047)  
Update (hidden) environment state, 𝜎, with motor 
𝜎(cid:3047)(cid:2878)(cid:2869) ← Environment(𝑎(cid:3047) , 𝜎(cid:3047) ) 
action. Get next reward, 𝑟, and observation, 𝑜. 
𝑟 , 𝑜 ← Environment(𝜎(cid:3047)(cid:2878)(cid:2869) )
eligibility trace. Gating action trace is analogous.) 
𝑠(cid:3047)(cid:2878)(cid:2869) ← 𝑜 , 𝑔(cid:3047) , 𝑠(cid:3047)   
Compute state-value prediction error, 𝛿(cid:3047) , based on 
𝛿(cid:3047) ← 𝑟 + 𝛾𝑉(𝑠(cid:3047)(cid:2878)(cid:2869) ) − 𝑉(𝑠(cid:3047) ) 
critic’s state-value approximation, 𝑉(𝑠) 
Update internal state based on previous state, gating 
𝑒 (cid:3023) (𝑠) = (cid:3420)𝛾𝜆𝑒 (cid:3023) (𝑠) + 1, 𝑠 = 𝑠(cid:3047)
action, and new observation 
Update state-value eligibility traces, 𝑒 (cid:3023) . 
𝛾𝜆𝑒 (cid:3023) (𝑠), 𝑠 ≠ 𝑠(cid:3047) ,    ∀ 𝑠  
𝑉(𝑠) = 𝑉(𝑠) + 𝛼𝛿(cid:3047) 𝑒 (cid:3023) (𝑠), ∀ 𝑠   
𝑢(𝑠, 𝑎) = 𝑢(𝑠 , 𝑎) + 𝛼𝛿(cid:3047) 𝑒(cid:3014) (𝑠, 𝑎),
∀ 𝑠, 𝑎 
𝑣(𝑠 , 𝑔) = 𝑣(𝑠 , 𝑔) + 𝛼𝛿(cid:3047) 𝑒 (cid:3008) (𝑠 , 𝑔),
∀ 𝑠, 𝑔 
Update state-values  
𝑠(cid:3047) ← 𝑠(cid:3047)(cid:2878)(cid:2869)  
Update motor action preferences 
Update gating action preferences 
Next trial… 
Williams 's  (𝑟 − 𝑏)  term  [14].  We  describe  here  a  single gating  actor,  but  it  is  straightforward  to 
 
generalize to an array of independent gating actors as we use in our simulations. 𝛾 = discount rate; 
Table  1  Pseudocode  of  one  trial  of  the  model,  based  on  the  Actor/Critic  architecture  with 
𝜆 = eligibility trace decay rate; 𝛼 =learning rate. In all simulations, 𝛾 = 0.94, 𝛼 = 0.1. 
eligibility  traces.  Following  [13],  we  substitute  the  critic's  state-value  prediction   error  for  
to   be   supported   in   PFC) ,   and   altering   the   Gating   model   so   that  the   role  of   working  memory  
is explicitly  to  support optimal behavior  (in  terms  of  discounted  future reward)  in  a POMDP.   
Like   [6],   the   key  difference  between   our   model  and   standard   RL  methods   is  that   our   state  
variable  includes  controlled  memory  elements  (i.e.,  working   memory),  which   augment  the  
current  observation.  The  action  space  is   similar ly  augmented  to  inc lude  memory  or  gating 
actions ,   and   the   model  learns   by  trial-and-error   how  to   update  its   working   memory  (to  
resolve  hidden  states  when  such  resolution  leads  to   greater  rewards)  as  well  as   its  mo tor 
policy.   The  task   for  our  model  then ,  is  to   learn  a  working  memory  policy  such   that  the 
current  internal  state  (i .e. ,   memory   and   current  observation)   admits   an   optimal  behavioral  
policy.    
Our  model  (Table  1)   consists  of   a  critic,  a  motor  actor,  and   several  gating   actors . As  in   the 
standard  Actor/Critic  architecture,  the  critic  learns  to   evaluate  (internal)  states  and ,   based   on  
the  ongoing  temporal  difference  of  these  values ,  generates  at  each  time  s tep  a  prediction 
error  (PE)  signal  (thought  to  correspond   to  phasic bursts and  dips   in  DA  [8]) .  The  PE   is used 
to   train   the critic 's s tate values and   the policies of   the ac tors. The motor actor  also  fulfills  the 
usual  role,   choosing   actions  to   send   to   the   environment  based   on  its  policy  and   the   current  
internal  state .   Finally,   gating   actors  correspond   one-to-one  with   each   memory  element.   At  
each  time  point,  each  gating  actor  independently  chooses  (via  a  policy  based  on  the  internal 
state)  whether  to  (1)  maintain   its  element 's  memory  for  another  time  step,  or  (2)  replace  
(update) its element 's memory with the current observation.  
To   remain   aligned  with  the  Actor/Critic  online  learning  framework  of  mesostriata l  RL  [9-
10],   learning   in   our  model  is  based   on  REINFORCE  [14]  modified   for  expected   discounted  
used   TD(𝜆),  taking   the  characteris tic  e ligibilities  of   the  REINFORCE  algorithm  [14]  as  the  
future  reward  [13],  rather  than   the  Monte-Carlo   policy  learning   algorithm  in   [6]  (which  is  
more  suitable   for  offline,  episodic  learning).  Furthermore,  because  it  has  been   shown  that 
eligibility  traces  are  particularly  useful  when   applying   TD   to  POMDPs   (e .g .,   [15-16]) ,   we 
impulse  function   for  a  replacing   eligibility  trace   [17].  For  simplicity  of   exposition   and  
interpretation ,  we used  tabular policy and  state-value representations throughout.  

Figure 1 12-AX: Average performance over 40  training  runs, each  consisting of 2×107  timesteps. 
 
when  the  eligibility  trace  parameter,  𝝀,  is  between  zero  and  one.  (B)  The  time  required  for  the 
 
model  to  reach  300  consecutive  correct  trials  increases  rapidly  as  𝝀  decreases.  (C)  Sample  
(A)  As  indicated  by  reward  rate  over  the  last  105  time  steps,  the  model  learns  an  optimal  policy 
sequence  of  the  12-AX  task.   
 
3  
B e n c h m a r k   P e r f o r m a n c e   a n d   P s y c h o l o g i c a l   D a t a  
We  now   describe   the   model 's   performance   on   the   12-AX   task   proposed   as   a   benchmark   for  
Gating   models  [4].   We  then   turn   to  a   comparison   of  the   model 's   behavior   against  actual  
psychological data.  
 
1 2 - A X   P e r f o r m a n c e    
3 . 1  
The  12-AX  task   was  used   in   [4]  to   illustrate  the  problem  of   learning   a  task   in  which   correct 
behavior   depends   on  multip le  previous  observations .  In   the   task   (Figure  1C) ,  subjects   are  
presented  with   a   sequence   of   observations   drawn   from  the   set  {1 ,   2 ,  A ,  B,  C,  X ,  Y, Z} .  They 
gain   rewards  by   responding  L  or  R  according  to  the  following  rules:  Respond  R  if   (1)  the 
current  observation   is  an   X,  the  last  observation   from  the  set  {A,   B,  C}  was  an  A,  and   the 
last  observation   from  the   set  {1 ,   2}   was   a   1;  or   (2)   the   current  observation   is  a   Y,   the   last 
observation   from  the  set  {A, B, C} was  a B,  and  the  last observation   from  the  set  {1 , 2} was 
a  2 . Respond L otherwise .   In  our  implementation ,   reward   is 1  for  correct  responses when  the  
optimal  performance.  The  results  (Figure   1A,B)   show   that  our  TD(𝜆)  Gating  model  can 
current  observation   is  X  or   Y,   0.25   for   all  other   correct  responses ,   and  0  for   incorrect  
responses. 
model  on  the   eligibility  trace  parameter,   𝜆,  with   best  performance   at  high   intermediate  
We  modeled   this  task   using  two   memory  elements,  the  minimum  theoretically  necessary  for 
values of  𝜆.  When  = 0,  the model  finds a suboptimal policy  that  is only slightly better  than  
the  optima l  policy  for  a  model  without  working  memory.  With  = 1  performance  is  even 
indeed   achieve  optimal  12-AX   performance .  The  results  also  demonstrate  the  reliance  of  the 
observable   (non-Markovian)   settings   [15],   whereas   TD(𝜆)   (without   memory)   with   𝜆 ≈ 0.9 
worse,  as  can  be  expected  for  an  online  policy  improvement  method  with  non-decaying  
traces  (a  point  of  comparison  with  [6]  to   which  we  will  return  in  the  Discussion).  These 
results  are   consistent  with   previous   work   showing   that  TD(0)  performs  poorly  in   partially 
performs  best   [16].   Indeed ,   early  in   training ,   as   our  model  learns   to   convert  a   POMDP  to   an 
MDP  via   its  working  memory,   the   internal  state   dynamics   are   not  Markovian ,  and   thus   an  
eligibility trace is necessary.  
 
3 . 2  
P s y c h o l o g i c a l   d a t a  
We  are  the  first  to   interpret  the  Gating  framework   (and   the  use  of   working  memory)  as  an 
attempt  to   solve   POMDPs .  This  brings   a   large   body  of   theoretical  work   to   bear   on   the 
properties  of   Gating   models.  Importantly,  it  imp lies  that,  as  task   comp lexity  increases,  both 
the  Gating   model  and   humans  must  fail  to   find  optimal  solutions  in  reasonable  time  frames    

 
Figure  2  (A)  Artificial  grammar  from  [11].  Starting  from  node  0,  the  grammar  generates  a 
continuing sequence of observations. All nodes with two transitions (edges) make either transition 
with  p=0.5.  Edge  labels  mark  grammatical  observations.  At  each  transition,  the  grammatical 
observation  is  replaced  with  a  random,  ungrammatical,  observation  with  p=0.15.  The  task  is  to 
predict  the  next  observation  at  each  time  point.  (B)  The  model  shows  a  gradual  increase  in 
sensitivity to sequences of length 2 and 3, but not length 4, replicating the human data. Sensitivity 
is measured  as  probability  of  choosing  grammatical  action  for  the  true  state, minus  probability  of 
choosing  grammatical  action  for  the  aliased  state;  0  indicates  complete  aliasing,  1  complete 
resolution.  (C)  Model  performance  (reward  rate)  averaged  over  training  runs  with  variable 
numbers of time steps shows diminishing returns as the number of memory elements increases. 
due  to  the  generally  intractable  nature  of  POMDPs.  Given   this  inescapable  conclusion ,  it  is   
interesting   to   compare  model  failures  to   corresponding  human   failures:  a  pattern   of   failures 
matching   human   data would  provide   support  for   our model.  In   this  subsection  we  describe  a  
simula tion   of  artificia l  grammar   learning   [11],   and   then   offer   an   account  of   the  pervasive 
"magic number"  observations concerning  limits of  working  memory capacity (e .g . ,  [12]) .   
In   artificia l  grammar   learning ,  subjects   see   a   seemingly  random  sequence   of  observations , 
and  are  instructed  to  mimic   each  observation  as  quickly  as  possible  (or  to  predict  the  next 
observation)  with   a   corresponding   action .  Unknown  to   the  subjects ,   the   observation  
sequence   is  generated   by  a   stochastic  process   called   a   "grammar"   (Figure   2A).   Artificial  
grammar  tasks  constitute  POMDPs:  the  (recent)  observation  history  can  predict  the  next  
observation   better   than   the   current  observation   alone ,   so   optimal   performance   requires 
subjects  to   remember  information   distilled   from  the  history.   Although   subjects  typica lly  
report  no  knowledge   of   the  underlying   structure ,   after  training   their   reaction   times   (RTs) 
reveal  implic it  structural  knowledge .  Specifically,  RTs  become  significantly  faster  for 
"gramma tica l"  as compared to  "ungramma tica l" observations (see Figure 2).  
Cleeremans and McClelland [11] examined   the  limits of  subjects ' capacity  to detect grammar  
structure .  The  grammar   they  used   is  shown   in  Figure 2A . They  found   that,  although   subjects 
grew  increasingly  sensitive   to   sequences  of   length   two   and   three  throughout  training ,   (as 
measured  by  transient  RT  increases  following  ungrammatica l  observations),  they  rema ined  
insensitive,  even   after  60 ,000   time  steps  of  training ,   to  sequences  of  length  four.  This 
presumably  reflected  a  failure  of  subjects '  implicit  working   memory   learning   mechanisms ,  
and   was   confirmed   in   a   second  experiment  [11].   We  replicated   these   results,   as   shown   in 
Figure  2B.  To  simulate  the  task ,  we  gave  the  model  two   memory  e lements  (results   were  no 
different  with  three  elements),  and  reward  1  for  each  correct  prediction.  We  tested  the  
model 's   ability  to   resolve  states   based   on   previous   observations   by  contrasting   its  behavior 
across  pairs  of  observation  sequences  that  differed  only  in   the  first  observation.  State 
resolution   based   on   sequences   of   length   two ,   three ,   and  four  were   represented   by VS   versus  
XS  (leading  to   predictions  Q  vs.  V/P,   respectively) ,  SQX  versus  XQX  (S/Q  vs.   P/T),  and 
XTVX versus  PTVX (S/Q vs.  P/T), respectively.    
In   this  task ,   optimal   use   of   information   from  sequences   of   length   four   or   more   proved 
However,   at  (cid:31) + 1  time  steps  in  the  past,  observation  A  precedes  state  1,  whereas 
impossible  for  the  model  and,  apparently,  for  humans.  To   understand  intuitive ly  this  
limitation ,   consider  a  problem  of   two   hidden  states,  1   and  2 ,  with  optima l  actions  L  and  R, 
respectively.   The  states  are  preceded  by  identica l  observation  sequences  of  length  (cid:31). 

(cid:31) + 1  time  steps  decreases  geometrically  with  (cid:31),  thus  the  probability  of  resolving  states  1 
observation B precedes  state 2. The probability  that A/B  are held  in memory  for  the  required 
and  2  decreases  geome trica lly.   Because  the  agent  cannot  resolve  state  1  from  sta te   2,  it  can 
never   learn   the   appropriate   1-L ,   2-R  action   preferences   even  if  it  explores  those  actions,  a 
more  insidious  problem  than   an RL  agent  faces  in  a  fully  observable  setting. As  a  result,  the 
model  can’t  reinforce optimal gating polic ies,  eventually  learning  an  in ternal  state  space  and  
dynamics  that  fail to  reflect  the  true  environment. The problem is  that credit assignment (i.e., 
learning  a  mapping   from working  memory  to  actions)   is only useful  inasmuch  as   the   internal  
state  corresponds  to  the  true  hidden  state  of  the  POMDP,   leading  to   a  “chicken-and-egg” 
problem.  
Given  the  preceding  argument,  one  obvious  modification  that  might  lead  to  improved 
performance  is  to  increase  the  number  of  memory  e lements.   As  the  number   of   memory  
elements  increases,  the  probability  that  the model  remembers  observation  A  for  the  required 
amount  of  
time  approaches   one .  However, 
this  strategy 
introduces 
the  curse  of  
dimensionality due to the rapidly increasing size of the internal state space. 
This  intuitive  analysis  suggests  a  normative  explanation   for   the  famous   "magic   number"  
limitation   observed  in   human   working  memory  capacity,   thought  to   be   about  four 
independent elements  (e .g . ,   [12]) .  We demonstrate  this  idea by again  simula ting  the  artificia l 
grammar   task ,   this  time  averaging   performance   over   a   range   of   training   times   (1   to   10  
million  time steps)  to  capture  the  idea   that  humans  may  practice  novel tasks  for  a  typical,  but 
variable,  amount of   time.   Indeed  the averaged  results  show diminishing   returns of   increasing  
memory   elements  (Figure   2C) .   This  simu lation   used   tabular   (rather   than   more   neurally  
plausible)   representations   and   a  highly  simplified   model,   so   the  exact  number   of   policy  
parame ters  and  state  values  to   be  estima ted,  time  s teps,   and   working  memory  e lements  is  
somewhat  arbitrary  in   relation   to   human   learning .  Still,  the  model 's  qualitative  behavior 
(evidenced  by  the  shape  of  the  resulting  curve  and   the  order  of   magnitude  of  the  optima l  
number   of working memory   elements)   is  surprisingly  reminiscent  of   human   behavior.  Based  
on  this  we  suggest  that  the  limitation   on   working  memory  capacity  may  be  due  to  a 
limitation   on   learning   rather  than  on   storage:  it  may  be  impractica l  to   learn   to  utilize  more  
than   a   very  small  number   (i.e . ,   smaller   than   10)   of   independent  working  memory   elements,  
due to  the curse of  dimensionality.   
 
4  
D i s c u s s i o n  
We  have  presented  a  psychological  model  that  suggests  that  dopaminergic  PE  signals  can 
implicitly  shape  working  memory  representations  in  PFC.  Our  model  synthesizes  recent 
advances  in  the  Gating  literature  [4]  with  norma tive  RL  theory  regarding  model-free,  finite  
memory  solutions   to  POMDPs   [6].  We  showed   that  the   model  learns   to   behave  optima lly  in  
the   benchmark   12-AX  task . We  also   related   the   model 's   computational  limitations   to   known  
limitations  of  human  working  memory [11-12]. 
 
4 . 1  
R e l a t i o n   t o   o t h e r   t h e o r e t i c a l   w o r k  
Other  recent  work  in  neural  RL  has  argued  that  the  brain  applies  memory-based   POMDP 
solution   mechanisms  to   the   real-world  problems   faced   by  animals   [17-20].   That  work 
primarily  considers   model-based  mechanisms,  in   which   the  temporary  memory  is  a 
continuous  belief  state ,  and  assumes   that a  function  of  cerebral cortex  is  to   learn   the  required 
world   model,   and   specifically  that  PFC  should   represent  temporary  goal-   or   policy-related  
information   necessary  for   optimal   POMDP  behavior.  The   model  that  we   present  here   is  
related   to   that  line   of   thinking ,   demonstrating   a   model-free ,   rather   than   model-based,  
mechanism  for  learning  to   store  policy-related  information  in  PFC.  Different  learning  
systems  may  form  different  types  of  working  memory  representations.  Future  work   may 
investigate  the  relationship  between   imp lic it  learning   (as  in   this  Ga ting   model)  and   model-
free   POMDP  solutions ,   versus   other   kinds   of  learning  and   model-based   POMDP  solutions .  
Irrespective  of   the  POMDP  framework,  other  work   has  assumed  that  there  exists  a  gating 
policy  that  controls  task-relevant working memory  updating   in   PFC  (e .g . ,   [21]) .  The   present 
work  further develops  a  model of  how  this policy can  be  learned . 
It  is  interesting   to   compare   our  model  to   previous  work  on   model-free   POMDP  solutions . 

McCallum  first  emphasized   the   importance   of  learning  utile  distinctions  [5],   or  learning  to  
resolve  two   hidden   states  only  if  they  have  different  optima l  ac tions.  This  is  an   emphasis  
that our  model shares, at  least  in  spirit. Humans must of  course be extreme ly  flexib le  in   their 
behavior.  Therefore  there  is  an   inherent  tension   between   the  need   to  focus  cognitive 
resources   on  learning   the   immediate   task ,   and   the   need   to   form  a   basis   of   general  task  
knowledge   [3].   It  would   be   interesting   for   future   work  to   explore   how   closely  the   working  
memory   representations   learned   by  our   model  align   to   McCallum 's   utile   (and   less  
generalizable)  distinctions  as  opposed  to   more  generalizable  representations  of  the 
underlying   hidden  structure   of  the   world ,   or  whether   our  model  could   be   modified   to  
incorporate  
a   mixture  
of  
both 
kinds  
of 
knowledge,  
depending 
on  
some 
exploration/exploitation  parame ter.  
Our model most closely  follows  the Gating model described   in  [4], and  the  theoretical model  
described   in   [6].   Our   model  is  clearly   more   abstract  and   less   biologically  deta iled   than   [4].  
However,  our  intent was  to   ask  whether  the  important  insights  and   capabilities of   that model  
could   be   captured   using   a   four-parameter,   pure   RL  model  with   a   clear   norma tive   basis .  
Accordingly,   we   have  shown   that  such  a   model  is  comparably  equipped  to  simula te  a  range 
of   psychological  phenomena .   Our  model  also   makes   equally  testable  (albeit  different)  
so   poorly  when   (cid:31) = 1,  as  this  produces  a  nearly  Monte-Carlo  scheme.  The  difference  was 
predictions  about  the  neural  DA  signal.  Rela tive  to  [6],  our  model  places  biological  and 
psychological  concerns   at  the   forefront,   eliminating   the   episodic   memory  requirements   of 
the  Monte-Carlo   algorithm.   It  is  perhaps   interesting ,   vis   á   vis   [6],   that  our  model  performed  
likely due  to our model 's  online  learning  (i.e., we  updated  the policy  at  each  time  step  rather 
than  at  the  ends  of  episodes), which   invalidates  the Monte-Carlo   approach . Thus  it might  be 
said  that our  model  is a  uniquely psychological variant of  that previous  architecture .    
 
4 . 2  
I m p l i c a t i o n s   f o r  W o r k i n g   M e m o r y   a n d   C o g n i t i v e   C o n t r o l  
Subjects  in  cognitive  control  experiments  typica lly  face  situations  in which  correct  behavior 
is  indeterminate   given   only  the   immediate   observation .  Working  memory  is  often   thought  of  
as   the   repository  of   temporary  information   that  augments  the   immediate   observation   to 
permit  correct  behavior,   sometimes   called   goals,   context,   task   set,   or   decision   categories .  
These   concepts  are  difficult  to  define .  Here we  have proposed  a   formal  theoretical definition  
for  the  cognitive  control  and   working  memory  constructs.  Due  to   the  importance  of 
temporally distant goals and  of   information   that  is not  immediately  observable,   the  canonical 
cognitive  control  environment  is  well  captured   by  a  POMDP.   Working   memory  is   then   the  
temporary  information ,   defined   and   updated   by  a   memory  control  policy,   that  the   animal  
uses  to  solve  these  POMDPs.  Model-based   research  might  identify  working  memory  with  
continuous  belief   states ,  whereas  our  model-free  framework   identifies  working  memory with  
a   discrete  collection   of   recent  observations .   These   may  correspond   to  the   products  of  
different  learning   systems,   but  the  outcome  is  the  same  in   either  case:  cognitive  control  is 
defined   as  an  animal 's memory-based POMDP  solver,  and  working  memory  is  defined   as   the 
information ,  derived  from recent history,  that the  solver  requires .   
 
4 . 3  
P s y c h o l o g i c a l   a n d   n e u r a l   v a l i d i t y  
Although  the  intractability  of   solving  a  POMDP  means  that  all  models  such  as  the  one  we 
present  here mus t  ultima tely  fail  to   find   an   optima l  solution   in   a  practica l  amount  of   time  (if 
at  all) ,   the   particular   manifestation   of  computational  limitations   in   our  model  aligns  
qualitatively  with   that  observed   in   humans.  Working  memory,  the   psychological  construct 
that  the   Gating   model  addresses ,   is  famously  limited   (see   [12]  for   a   review) .  Beyond  
canonical  working   memory   capacity  limitations ,   other  work   has   shown   subtler   limita tions  
arising   in   learning  contexts  (e .g . ,  [11]) .  The   results  that  we presented  here are promising ,  but 
it  remains  for  future  work   to   more  fully   explore  the  relation   between   the  failures  exhibited 
by this model and  those  exhibited  by humans . 
In   conclusion,   we  have   shown  that  the  Gating   framework   provides   a   connection   between  
high   level  cognitive  concepts  such  as  working  memory  and   cognitive  control,  systems 
neuroscience ,   and   current  neural  RL  theory.   The   framework 's  tria l-and-error  method   for 
solving   POMDPs   gives   rise   to   particular   limitations   that  are   reminiscent  of   observed 

psychological  limits.  It  remains  for  future  work   to  further  investigate  the  model 's  ability  to  
capture   a   range   of   specific   psychological  and   neural  phenomena .   Our   hope   is  that  this  link  
between   working   memory   and   POMDPs  will  be   fruitful  in   generating   new  insights,  and 
suggesting further  experimental and  theoretical work . 

A c k n o w l e d g m e n t s  
We thank  Peter  Dayan ,  Randy O 'Reilly, and  Michael Frank  for productive discussions, and  
three  anonymous  reviewers  for  helpful comments.  This work  was  supported  by NIH  grant 
5R01MH052864  (MT &  JDC)  and  a  Human  Frontiers  Science  Program Fellowship  (YN) 

R e f e r e n c e s  
[1] Braver, T. S., & Cohen, J. D. (1999). Dopamine, cognitive control, and schizophrenia: The gating model. 
In  J. A.  Reggia,  E.  Ruppin, & D. Glanzman  (Eds.), Progress  in  Brain  Research  (pp.  327-349). Amsterdam, 
North-Holland: Elsevier Science. 
[2]  Braver,  T.  S.,  &  Cohen,  J.  D.  (2000).  On  the  Control  of  Control:  The  Role  of  Dopamine  in  Regulating 
Prefrontal  Function  and  Working  Memory.  In  S.  Monsell,  &  J.  S.  Driver  (Eds.),  Control  of  Cognitive 
Processes: Attention and Performance XVIII (pp. 713-737). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
[3]  Rougier,  A.,  Noelle,  D.,  Braver,  T.,  Cohen,  J.,  &  O'Reilly,  R.  (2005).  Prefrontal  Cortex  and  Flexible 
Cognitive  Control:  Rules  Without  Symbols.  Proceedings  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences  ,  102  (20), 
7338-7343.  
[4]  O'Reilly,  R.  C.,  &  Frank,  M.  J.  (2006).  Making  Working  Memory  Work:  A  Computational  Model  of 
Learning in the Prefrontal Cortex and Basal Ganglia. Neural Computation , 18, 283-328. 
[5] McCallum, A.  (1995).  Instance-Based Utile Distinctions  for Reinforcement  Learning with Hidden  State. 
International Conference on Machine Learning, (pp. 387-395). 
[6]  Peshkin,  L.,  Meuleau,  N.,  &  Kaelbling,  L.  (1999).  Learning  Policies  with  External  Memory.  Sixteenth 
International Conference on Machine Learning, (pp. 307-314).  
[7]  Montague,  P.  R.,  Dayan,  P.,  &  Sejnowski,  T.  J.  (1996).  A  Framework  for  Mesencephalic  Dopamine 
Systems Based on Predictive Hebbian Learning. The Journal of Neuroscience , 16 (5), 1936-1947. 
[8] Schultz, W., Dayan, P., & Montague, P. R. (1997). A Neural Substrate of Prediction and Reward. Science 
, 275, 1593-1599.  
[9]  Houk,  J.,  Adams,  J.,  &  Barto,  A.  (1995).  A  Model  of  how  the  Basal  Ganglia  Generate  and  use  Neural 
Signals  that  Predict  Reinforcement.  In  J. Houk,  J. Davis, & D. Beiser, Models  of  Information  Processing  in 
the Basal Ganglia. MIT Press. 
[10]  Joel, D., Niv, Y., & Ruppin, E.  (2002). Actor-critic Models of  the Basal Ganglia: New Anatomical  and 
Computational Perspectives. Neural Networks , 15, 535-547. 
[11]  Cleeremans,  A.,  &  McClelland,  J.  (1991).  Learning  the  Structure  of  Event  Sequences.  Journal  of 
Experimental Psychology: General , 120 (3), 235-253. 
[12] Cowan, N. (2000). The Magical Number 4 in Short-term Memory: A Reconsideration of Mental Storage 
Capacity. Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 24, 87-114. 
[13] Dayan, P., & Abbott, L. (2001). Theoretical Neuroscience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
[14] Williams, R. (1992). Simple Statistical Gradient-Following Algorithms for Connectionist Reinforcement 
Learning. Machine Learning , 8, 229-256. 
[15]  Singh,  S.,  Jaakkola,  T.,  &  Jordan,  M.  I.  (1994).  Learning  Without  State-Estimation  in  Partially 
Observable  Markovian  Decision  Processes.  Eleventh  International  Conference  on  Machine  Learning,  (pp. 
284-292).  
[16]  Loch,  J.,  &  Singh,  S.  (1998).  Using  Eligibility  Traces  to  Find  the  Best Memoryless  Policy  in  Partially 
Observable Markov Decision Processes. Fifteenth  International Conference on Machine Learning,  (pp. 323-
331). 
[17]  Sutton,  R.,  &  Barto,  A.  (1998).  Reinforcement  Learning:  An  Introduction.  Cambridge,  MA:  The  MIT 
Press.  
[18]  Daw,  N.,  Courville,  A.,  &  Touretzky,  D.  (2006).  Representation  and  Timing  in  Theories  of  the 
Dopamine System. Neural Computation , 18, 1637-1677. 
[19]  Samejima,  K.,  &  Doya,  K.  (2007).  Multiple  Representations  of  Belief  States  and  Action  Values  in 
Corticobasal Ganglia Loops. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences , 213-228. 
[20] Yoshida, W., & Ishii, S. (2006). Resolution of Uncertainty in Prefrontal Cortex. Neuron , 50, 781-789. 
[21] Dayan,  P.  (2007). Bilinearity, Rules,  and  Prefrontal Cortex. Frontiers  in Computational Neuroscience  , 
1, 1-14. 

