Sequential effects: Superstition or rational behavior?

Angela J. Yu
Department of Cognitive Science
University of California, San Diego
ajyu@ucsd.edu

Jonathan D. Cohen
Department of Psychology
Princeton University
jdc@princeton.edu

Abstract

In a variety of behavioral tasks, subjects exhibit an automatic and apparently sub-
optimal sequential effect: they respond more rapidly and accurately to a stimulus
if it reinforces a local pattern in stimulus history, such as a string of repetitions or
alternations, compared to when it violates such a pattern. This is often the case
even if the local trends arise by chance in the context of a randomized design, such
that stimulus history has no real predictive power. In this work, we use a normative
Bayesian framework to examine the hypothesis that such idiosyncrasies may re-
ﬂect the inadvertent engagement of mechanisms critical for adapting to a changing
environment. We show that prior belief in non-stationarity can induce experimen-
tally observed sequential effects in an otherwise Bayes-optimal algorithm. The
Bayesian algorithm is shown to be well approximated by linear-exponential ﬁlter-
ing of past observations, a feature also apparent in the behavioral data. We derive
an explicit relationship between the parameters and computations of the exact
Bayesian algorithm and those of the approximate linear-exponential ﬁlter. Since
the latter is equivalent to a leaky-integration process, a commonly used model
of neuronal dynamics underlying perceptual decision-making and trial-to-trial de-
pendencies, our model provides a principled account of why such dynamics are
useful. We also show that parameter-tuning of the leaky-integration process is
possible, using stochastic gradient descent based only on the noisy binary inputs.
This is a proof of concept that not only can neurons implement near-optimal pre-
diction based on standard neuronal dynamics, but that they can also learn to tune
the processing parameters without explicitly representing probabilities.

1

Introduction

One common error human subjects make in statistical inference is that they detect hidden patterns
and causes in what are genuinely random data. Superstitious behavior, or the inappropriate linking
of stimuli or actions with consequences, can often arise in such situations, something also observed
in non-human subjects [1, 2]. One common example in psychology experiments is that despite a
randomized experimental design, which deliberately de-correlate stimuli from trial to trial, subjects
pick up transient patterns such as runs of repetitions and alternations, and their responses are fa-
cilitated when a stimulus continues to follow a local pattern, and impeded when such a pattern is
violated [3]. It has been observed in numerous experiments [3–5], that subjects respond more accu-
rately and rapidly if a trial is consistent with the recent pattern (e.g. AAAA followed by A, BABA
followed by B ), than if it is inconsistent (e.g. AAAA followed by B , BABA followed by A). This
sequential effect is more prominent when the preceding run has lasted longer. Figure 1a shows re-
action time (RT) data from one such experiment [5]. Error rates follow a similar pattern, reﬂecting
a true expectancy-based effect, rather than a shift in RT-accuracy trade-off.

A natural interpretation of these results is that local patterns lead subjects to expect a stimulus,
whether explicitly or implicitly. They readily respond when a subsequent stimulus extends the local
pattern, and are “surprised” and respond less rapidly and ac curately when a subsequent stimulus
violates the pattern. When such local patterns persist longer, the subjects have greater conﬁdence in

1

