A rational model of preference learning
and choice prediction by children

Christopher G. Lucas
Department of Psychology
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
clucas@berkeley.edu

Thomas L. Grifﬁths
Department of Psychology
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
tom griffiths@berkeley.edu

Fei Xu
Department of Psychology
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, B.C., Canada V6T 1Z4
fei@psych.ubc.ca

Christine Fawcett
Max-Planck-Institute for Psycholinguistics
Wundtlaan 1, Postbus 310
6500AH, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
christine.fawcett@mpi.nl

Abstract

Young children demonstrate the ability to make inferences about the preferences
of other agents based on their choices. However, there exists no overarching ac-
count of what children are doing when they learn about preferences or how they
use that knowledge. We use a rational model of preference learning, drawing on
ideas from economics and computer science, to explain the behavior of children
in several recent experiments. Speciﬁcally, we show how a simple econometric
model can be extended to capture two- to four-year-olds’ use of statistical infor-
mation in inferring preferences, and their generalization of these preferences.

1

Introduction

Economists and computer scientists are often concerned with inferring people’s preferences from
their choices, developing econometric methods (e.g., [1, 2]) and collaborative ﬁltering algorithms
(e.g., [3, 4, 5]) that will allow them to assess the subjective value of an item or determine which
other items a person might like. However, identifying the preferences of others is also a key part of
social cognitive development, allowing children to understand how people act and what they want.
Young children are thus often in the position of economists or computer scientists, trying to infer
the nebulous preferences of the people around them from the choices they make. In this paper, we
explore whether the inferences that children draw about preferences can be explained within the
same kind of formalism as that used in economics and computer science, testing the hypothesis that
children are making rational inferences from the limited data available to them.
Before about 18 months of age, children seem to assume that everyone likes the same things as
themselves, having difﬁculty understanding the subjective nature of preferences (e.g., [6]). However,
shortly after coming to recognize that different agents can maintain different preferences, children
demonstrate a remarkably sophisticated ability to draw conclusions about the preferences of others
from their behavior. For example, two-year-olds seem to be capable of using shared preferences
between an agent and themselves as the basis for generalization of other preferences [7], while three-
and four-year-olds can use statistical information to reason about preferences, inferring a preference
for an object when an agent chooses the object more often than expected by chance [8].
This literature in developmental psychology is paralleled by work in econometrics on statistical
models for inferring preferences from choices. In this paper, we focus on an approach that grew out

1

of the Nobel prize-winning work of McFadden (see [1] for a review), exploring a class of models
known as mixed multinomial logit models [2]. These models assume that agents assign some utility
to every option in a choice, and choose in a way that is stochastically related to these utilities. By
observing the choices people make, we can recover their utilities by applying statistical inference,
providing a simple rational standard against which the inferences of children can be compared.
Research on preferences in computer science has tended to go beyond modeling individual choice,
focusing on predicting which options people will like based not just on their own previous choice
patterns but also drawing on the choices of other people – a problem known as collaborative ﬁlter-
ing [3]. This work has led to the development of the now-ubiquitous recommendation systems that
suggest which items one might like to purchase based on previous purchases, and has reached no-
toriety through the recent Netﬂix challenge. Economists have also explored models for the choices
of multiple agents, using hierarchical Bayesian statistics [9]. These models combine information
across agents to make inferences about the properties or value of different options.
Our contribution in this paper is to bring together these different threads of research to develop ratio-
nal models of children’s inferences about preferences. Section 2 summarizes developmental work
on children’s inferences about preferences. Section 3 outlines the basic idea behind rational choice
models, drawing on previous work in economics and computer science. We then consider how these
models can be used to explain developmental data, with Section 4 concerned with inferences about
preferences from choices, and Section 5 focusing on inferences about the properties of objects from
preferences. Section 6 discusses the implications of our results and concludes the paper.

2 Children’s inferences about preferences

The basic evidence that children do not differentiate the preferences of others before about 18 months
of age comes from Repacholi and Gopnik [6]. Subsequent work has built on these results to explore
the kinds of cues that children can use in inferring preferences, and how children generalize consis-
tent patterns of preferences.

2.1 Learning preferences from statistical evidence

While 18-month-olds are able to infer preferences from affective responses, we often need to make
inferences from more impoverished data, such as the patterns of choices that people make when
faced with various options. Recent work by Kushnir and colleagues [8] provided the ﬁrst evidence
that 3- and 4-year-old children can use statistical sampling information as the basis for inferring an
agent’s preference for toys. Three groups of children were tested in a simple task. Each child was
shown a big box of toys. For the ﬁrst group, the box was ﬁlled with just one type of toy (e.g., 100%
red discs). For the second group, the box was ﬁlled with two types of toys (e.g., 50% red discs and
50% blue plastic ﬂowers). For the third group, the box was also ﬁlled with two types of toys, but in
different proportions (e.g., 18% red discs and 82% blue plastic ﬂowers). A puppet named Squirrel
came in to play a game with the child. Squirrel looked into the box and picked out ﬁve toys. The
sample always consisted of ﬁve red discs for all three conditions. Then the child was given three toys
– a red disc (the target), a blue plastic ﬂower (the alternative), and a yellow cylinder (the distractor) –
and was asked to give Squirrel the one he liked. Each child received two trials with different objects.
The results of the experiment showed that the children chose the target (the red disc) 0.96, 1.29, and
1.67 times (out of 2) in the 100%, 50%, and 18% conditions, respectively, suggesting that children
used the non-random sampling behavior of Squirrel as the basis for inferring his preferences.

2.2 Generalizing from shared preferences

Recognizing that preferences can vary from one agent to another also establishes an opportunity
to discover that those preferences can differ in the degree to which they are related to one’s own.
Fawcett and Markson [7] asked under what conditions children would use shared preferences be-
tween themselves and another agent as the basis for generalization, using a task similar to the
“collaborative ﬁltering” problem explored in computer science. Their experiments began with four
blocks of training involving two actors. In each block the actors introduced two objects from a com-
mon category, including toys, television shows and foods. Each actor expressed liking the object
she introduced and dislike for the other’s object. One actor had preferences that were matched to the

2

child’s in all blocks, in that her objects had features chosen to be more interesting to the child. After
each actor reacted to the objects, the child was given an opportunity to play with the objects, and his
or her preference for one object over the other was judged by independent coders, based on relative
interest in and play with each object.
After the training blocks, the ﬁrst test block began. Each actor brought out a new object that was
described as being in the same category as the training objects, but was hidden from the child by an
opaque container. Each actor then reacted to her novel object in a manner that varied by condition.
In the like condition, the actor’s reaction was to examine the object and describe it as her favorite
object of the category. In the dislike condition, she examined the object and expressed dislike. In
the indifferent condition the actor did not examine the toy, and professed ignorance about it. The
child was then given an opportunity to choose one hidden object to play with. Finally, a second test
block began, identical to the ﬁrst except that the hidden objects were members of a different category
from those seen in training. In Experiment 1, members of the new category could be taken to share
features with members of the training category, e.g., toys versus books, while in Experiment 2 the
new category was chosen to minimize such overlap, e.g., food versus television shows. Children
consistently chose the test items that were favored by the agent who shared their own preferences
during training, for both toys and the similar category, books. In contrast, when a highly distant
category was used during test, children did not show any systematic generalization behaviors. These
results suggest that children use shared preferences as the basis for generalization, but they also take
into account whether the categories are related or not.

2.3 Summary and prospectus

Recent results in developmental psychology indicate that young children are capable of making
remarkably sophisticated inferences about the preferences of others. This raises the question of
how they make these inferences, and whether the kinds of conclusions that children draw from
the behavior of others are justiﬁed. We explore this question in the remainder of the paper.
In
the tradition of rational analysis [10], we consider the problem of how one might optimally infer
people’s preferences from their choices, and compare the predictions of such a model with the
developmental data. The results of this analysis will help us understand how children might conceive
of the relationship between the choices that people make and the preferences they have.

3 A rational model connecting choice and preference

P (c = i|u) =

In developing a rational account of how an agent might learn others’ preferences from choice infor-
mation, we must ﬁrst posit a speciﬁc ecological relationship between people’s preferences and their
choices, and then determine how an agent would make optimal inferences from others’ behavior
given knowledge of this relationship. Fortunately, the relationship between preferences and choices
has been the subject of extensive research in economics and psychology.
One of the most basic models of choice behavior is the Luce-Shepard choice rule [11, 12], which
asserts that when presented with a set of J options with utilities u = (u1 , . . . , uJ ), people will
(cid:80)
choose option i with probability
exp(ui )
j exp(uj )
where j ranges over the options considered in the choice. Given this choice rule, learning about
an agent’s preferences is a simple matter of Bayesian inference. Speciﬁcally, having observed a
sequence of choices c = (c1 , . . . , cN ), we can compute a posterior distribution over the utilities of
(cid:82) P (c|u)p(u) du
the options involved by applying Bayes’ rule
p(u|c) = P (c|u)p(u)
where p(u) is a probability density expressing the prior probability of a vector of utilities u, and
the likelihood P (c|u) is obtained by assuming that the choices are independent given u, being the
product of the probabilities of the individual choices as in Equation 1.
While this simple model is sufﬁcient to capture preferences among a constrained set of objects, most
models used in econometrics aim to predict the choices that agents will make about novel objects.

(1)

(2)

3

(3)

(4)

p(βa ) dβa

P (c = j |X) =

This can be done by assuming that options have features that determine their utility, with the utility
of option i being a function of the utility of its features. If we let xi be a binary vector indicating
whether an option possesses each of a ﬁnite set of features, and βa be the utility that agent a assigns
to those features1 , we can express the utility of option i for agent a as the inner product of these two
vectors. The probability of agent a choosing option i is then
(cid:80)
a xi )
exp(βT
P (c = j |X, βa ) =
j exp(βT
a xj )
where X collects the features of all of the options. We can also integrate out βa to obtain the choice
(cid:90)
probabilities given just the features of the options, with
(cid:80)
exp(βT
a xi )
j exp(βT
a xj )
This corresponds to the mixed multinomial logit (MML; [2]) model, which has been used for several
decades in econometrics to model discrete-choice preferences in populations of consumers.
The MML model and the Luce-Shepard rule on which it is built are theoretically appealing for
several reasons. First, the Luce-Shepard rule reﬂects the choice probabilities that result when agents
seek to maximize their utility in the presence of noise on utilities that follows a Weibull distribution
[13], and is thus compatible with the standard assumptions of statistical decision theory. Second,
the MML can approximate the distribution of choices for essentially any heterogeneous population
of utility-maximizing agents given appropriate choice of p(βa ) [1]. Finally, this approach has been
widely used and generally successful in applications in marketing and econometrics (e.g., [9, 14]).
While a wide range of random utility models can be represented with an appropriate choice of
prior over βa , one common variation supposes that βa follows a Gaussian distribution around a
population mean which in turn has a Gaussian prior. Given that the individuals in the experiments we
examine are only dealing with two actors, we will assume a single-parameter prior in which different
agents’ preferences are independent and preferences for individual features are uncorrelated with a
Gaussian distribution with mean zero and variance σ2 : βa ∼ N (0, σ2 I).
The model outlined in this section provides a way to optimally answer the question of how to infer
the preferences of an agent from their choices. In the remainder of the paper, we explore how well
this simple rational model accounts for the inferences that children make about preferences, applying
the model to the key developmental phenomena introduced in the previous section.

4 Using statistical information to infer preferences

The experiment conducted by Kushnir and colleagues [8], discussed in Section 2.1, provides evi-
dence that children are sensitive to statistical information when inferring the preferences of agents.
In this section, we examine whether this inference is consistent with the predictions of the rational
model outlined above. We ﬁrst consider how to apply the MML model in this context, then discuss
the model predictions and alternative explanations.

4.1 Applying the MML model

The child’s goal is to learn what Squirrel’s preferences are, so as to offer an appropriate toy. Let
βa be Squirrel’s preferences, c = (c1 . . . cN ) the sequence of N choices Squirrel makes, and
Xn = [xn1 . . . xnJn ]T the observed features of Squirrel’s Jn options at choice event n. The
set {X1 , . . . , XN } will be denoted with X. Estimating βa entails computing p(βa |c, X) ∝
choices is P (c|X, βa ) = (cid:81)N
P (c|βa , X)p(βa ), analogous to the inference of u in Equation 2. The probability of Squirrel’s
n=1 P (cn |Xn , βa ), where P (cn = j |Xn , βa ) is given by Equation 3.
We chose to represent the objects as having minimal and orthogonal feature vectors, so that red
discs (Squirrel’s target toy) had features [1 0 0]T , blue ﬂowers (the alternative option in his choices)
had features [0 1 0]T , and yellow cylinders (the distractor) had features [0 0 1]T , respectively. The

1We will refer to the utilities of features as “preferences” to distinguish them from the utilities of options.

4

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Model predictions for data in [8]. (a) Predicted probability that objects will be selected,
plotted against observed proportions. (b) Sensitivity of model to setting of variance parameter.

number of options in each choice Squirrel made from the box was the total number of objects
in the box (38), with each type of object being represented with the appropriate frequency. The
N = 5 choices made by Squirrel thus provide the data c from which its preferences can be inferred.
We constructed an approximation to the posterior distribution over βa given c using importance
sampling (see, e.g., [15] for details), drawing a sample of values of βa from the prior distribution
p(βa ) and giving each value weight proportional to the corresponding likelihood P (c|X, βa ).
The child must now select an object to give Squirrel, with one target, one alternative, and one
distractor as options. If we suppose each child is matching Squirrel’s choice distribution, we can use
the Luce-Shepard choice rule (Equation 3) to predict the rates at which children should choose the
different objects for a particular value of βa , P (cchild = j |X, βa ). The probability of a particular
(cid:90)
choice is then obtained by averaging over βa , with

(5)

P (cchild = j |X, c) =

P (cchild = j |X, βa )p(βa |X, c) dβa

which we compute using the approximate posterior distribution yielded by importance sampling.
All simulations presented here use 106 samples, and were performed for a range of values of σ2 , the
parameter that determines the variance of the prior on βa .

4.2 Results

Figure 1 (a) compares the predictions of the model with σ2 = 2 to the participants’ choice probabil-
ities. The sum squared error (SSE) of the predictions was .0758 when compared with the observed
probabilities of selecting the target object, with the correlation of the model predictions and ob-
served data being r = 0.93. Figure 1 (b) shows that the goodness of ﬁt is generally insensitive to
the variance of the prior σ2 , provided σ2 > 1. This is essentially the only free parameter of the
model, as it sets the scale for the features X, indicating that there is a close correspondence between
the predictions of the rational model and the inferences of the children under a variety of reasonable
assumptions about the distribution of preferences.
The only conspicuous difference between the model’s predictions and the children’s choices was the
tendency of children to choose the target object more frequently than alternatives even when it was
the only object in the box. This can be explained by observing that under the cover story used in the
experiment, Squirrel was freely choosing to select objects from the box, implicitly indicating that
it was choosing these objects over other unobserved options. As a simple test of this explanation,
we generated new predictions under the assumption that each choice included one other unobserved
option, with features orthogonal to the choices in the box. This improved the ﬁt of the model,
resulting in an SSE of .05 and a correlation of r = .95.

5

targetalternatedistractor00.51Predictions vs choice probabilities for σ2=2100 percent targettargetalternatedistractor00.51P(choice)  50 percent targettargetalternatedistractor00.51object18 percent targetmodelchildren0123456789100.050.10.150.20.250.30.350.40.450.50.55varianceSum squared error (SSE)Variance (σ ) parameter versus sum squared error24.3 Alternative explanations

Kushnir and colleagues [8] suggest that the children in the experiment may be learning preferences
by using statistical information to identify situations where the agent’s behavior is not consistent
with random sampling. We do not dispute that this may be correct; our analysis does not entail a
commitment to a procedure by which children make inferences about preferences, but to the idea
that whatever the process is, it should provides a good solution to the problem with which children
are faced given the constraints under which they operate. We will add two observations. The ﬁrst
is that we need to consider how such an explanation might be generalized to explain behavior in
other preference-learning situations, and if not, what additional processes might be at work. The
second is that it is not difﬁcult to test salient variations on the sampling-versus-preference view
that are inconsistent with our own, as they predict that children make a dichotomous judgment –
distinguishing random from biased sampling – rather than one that reveals the extent of a preference
in addition to its presence and valence. The former predicts that over a wide range of sets of evidence
that indicate an agent strongly prefers objects of type X to those of type Y, one can generate evidence
consistent with a weaker preference for type W over Y (over more data points) that will lead children
to offer the agent objects of type W over X.

5 Generalizing preferences to novel objects

The study of Fawcett and Markson [7] introduced in Section 2.2 provides a way to go beyond simple
estimation of preferences from choices, exploring how children solve the “collaborative ﬁltering”
problem of generalizing preferences to novel objects. We will outline how this can be captured
using the MML model, present simulation results, and then consider alternative explanations.

5.1 Applying the MML model

Forming an appropriate generalization in this task requires two kinds of inferences. The ﬁrst infer-
ence the child must make – learning the actors’ preferences by computing p(βa |X, c) for a ∈ (1, 2)
– is the same as that necessary for the ﬁrst set of experiments discussed above. The second inference
is estimating the two hidden objects’ features via those preferences. In order to solve this problem,
we need to modify the model slightly to allow us to predict actions other than choices. Speciﬁ-
cally, we need to deﬁne how preferences are related to affective responses, since the actors simply
indicated their affective response to the novel object.
We will refer to the actor whose preferences matched those of the child as Actor 1, and the other
actor as Actor 2. Let the features of Actor a’s preferred object in round n be xna , the features of the
same-category novel object be xsa , and the features of the different-category novel object be xda .
When the category is irrelevant, we will use x∗a ∈ {xsa , xda} to indicate the features of the novel
object. The goal of the child is to infer x∗a (and thus whether they themselves will like the novel
(cid:90)
object) from the observed affective response of agent a, the features of the objects from the previous
rounds X, and the choices of the agent on the previous rounds c. This can be done by evaluating
P (x∗a |X, c, ra ) =
P (x∗a |βa , ra )p(βa |X, c) dβa
(6)
where P (x∗a |βa , ra ) is the posterior distribution over the features of the novel object given the
preferences and affective response of the agent. Computing this distribution requires deﬁning a
likelihood P (ra |x∗a , βa ) and a prior on features P (x∗a ). We deal with these problems in turn.
The likelihood P (ra |x∗a , βa ) reﬂects the probability of the agent producing a particular affective
response given the properties of the object and the agent’s preferences.
In the experiment, the
affective responses produced by the actors were of two types. In the like condition, the actor declared
this to be her favorite object. If one takes the actor’s statement at face value and supposes that the
actor has encountered an arbitrarily large number of such objects, then
P (x∗a |βa , ra = “like”) = 1 for x∗a = arg max
a x∗a , else 0
βT
x∗a
In the dislike condition, the action – saying “there’s a toy in here, but I don’t like it”– communicates
negative utility, or at least utility below some threshold which we will take to be zero, hence:
P (x∗a |βa , ra = “dislike”) = 1 for βT
a x∗a < 0, else 0

(8)

(7)

6

Figure 2: Model predictions for data in Exper-
iment 1 of [7], excluding cases where children
had fewer than 4 chances to play with training
objects. The preﬁxes C4 and C3 denote cases
where children chose to play with the objects
presented by the matched actor (i.e., Actor 1)
in training 4 and 3 times out of 4, respectively.
The third character denotes the like (L) or dislike
(D) condition, and the fourth character denotes
whether the object is in the same category (S)
or a different category (D) from those seen in
training. P (choice = 1) is the probability of
selecting Actor 1’s novel object.

In deﬁning the prior distributions from which the features of both the observed objects and the
novel objects are sampled, it is important to represent differences between categories. Our feature
vectors were concatenations of category-1 features, category-2 features, and multiple-category fea-
tures, where each feature was present with probability 0.5 if its category could possess the feature,
otherwise zero. We arbitrarily chose four features per category, for a total of twelve.
Having computed a posterior distribution over x∗a using this prior and likelihood, the child must
combine this information with his or her own preferences to select an object. Unfortunately, we do
not have direct access to the utilities of the children in this experiment, so we must estimate them
from the children’s choice data. We did this using the same procedure as for the adults’ utilities. That
done, we apply the choice rule a ﬁnal time and obtain choice probabilities for the objects selected
by the children on the ﬁnal trial.

5.2 Results

Figure 2 shows the rates at which children chose actor 1’s object and the model’s predictions for the
same. With the variance parameter set to σ2 = 2 and twelve features, the correlation between the
predictions and the data was r = 0.88. When examining only the 4-year-old participants (N = 68),
the correlation rose to r = 0.94. The number of features has little inﬂuence on predictive accuracy:
with 30 features, the correlations were r = 0.85 and r = 0.93 for all participants and 4-year-old
participants, respectively. The model predicts less-extreme probabilities than were observed in the
choices of the children, in particular in the cases where children chose to play with one of actor 2’s
objects. This may be attributed to actor 1’s objects having features one would expect people to like
a priori, making the zero-mean preference prior inappropriate.

5.3 Alternative explanations

The model described above provides good predictions of children’s inferences in this experiment,
but also attributes relatively complex beliefs to the child. A natural question is whether a simpler
mechanism might explain behavior in this case. Fawcett and Markson [7] discussed several alter-
native explanations of their ﬁndings, so this section will brieﬂy recapitulate their discussion with a
speciﬁc view towards alternative models.
The simplest model might suggest that children were simply learning associations between speciﬁc
behaviors by the matching actor and the presence of a desirable object. The most basic model of this
kind, assuming that the matching actor is generally associated with desirable objects, is falsiﬁed by
the children showing no bias towards the matching actor’s objects in the dislike condition. A more
elaborate version, in which children associate positive affect by the matching actor with desirable
objects, is inconsistent with children’s stronger preferences when the novel objects were similar to
the training objects. This evidence also runs against explanations that the children are selecting
objects based on liking the matched actor or believing that the matched actor is a more reliable
judge of quality. Any of these alternatives might be made to ﬁt the data via ad hoc assumptions

7

C4LSC4LDC4DSC4DDC3LSC3LDC3DSC3DD00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91ConditionP(choice=1)Model predictions versus child choices, 4 features, σ2=2modelchildrenabout subjective feature correlations or category similarity, but we see no reason to adopt a more
complex model without better explanatory power.

6 Conclusion

We have outlined a simple rational model for inferences about preferences from choices, drawing on
ideas from economics and computer science, and shown that this model produces predictions that
closely parallel the behavior of children reasoning about the preferences of others. These results shed
light on how children may think about choice, desire, and other minds, and highlight new questions
and possible extensions.
In future work, we intend to explore whether the developmental shift
discovered by Repacholi and Gopnik [6] can be explained in terms of rational model selection under
an MML view. We believe that a hierarchical MML and the “Bayesian Ockham’s razor” provide a
simple account, resembling a recent Bayesian treatment of false-belief learning [16]. Our approach
also provides a framework for predicting how children might make inferences to preferences at the
population level and exploring the information provided by correlated features.
Acknowledgments. This work was supported by AFOSR grant number FA9550-07-1-0351, NSERC and
SSHRC Canada, and the McDonnell Causal Learning Collaborative.

References
[1] D. McFadden and K. E. Train. Mixed MNL models of discrete response. Journal of Applied Economet-
rics, 15:447–470, 2000.
[2] J. Hayden Boyd and R. E. Mellman. Effect of fuel economy standards on the u.s. automotive market: An
hedonic demand analysis. Transportation Research A, 14:367–378, 1980.
[3] D. Goldberg, David N., B. M. Oki, and T. Douglas. Using collaborative ﬁltering to weave an information
tapestry. Communications of the ACM, 35(12):61–70, 1992.
[4] J. A. Konstan, B. N. Miller, D. Maltz, J. L. Herlocker, L. R. Gordon, and J. Riedl. Grouplens: applying
collaborative ﬁltering to usenet news. Communications of the ACM, 40:77–87, 1997.
[5] C. Kadie J. Breese, D. Heckerman. Empirical analysis of predictive algorithms for collaborative ﬁltering.
In Proceedings of the Fourteenth Annual Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (UAI 98),
San Francisco, CA, 1998. Morgan Kaufmann.
[6] B. M. Repacholi and A. Gopnik. Early reasoning about desires: Evidence from 14- and 18-month-olds.
Developmental Psychology, 33(1):12–21, 1997.
[7] C. A. Fawcett and L. Markson. Children reason about shared preferences. revised manuscript submitted
for publication. Developmental Psychology, under review.
[8] T. Kushnir, F. Xu, and H. Wellman. Preschoolers use sampling information to infer the preferences of
others. In 28th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 2008.
[9] K. E. Train, D. McFadden, and M. Ben-Akiva. The demand for local telephone service: A fully discrete
model of residential calling patterns and service choices. The RAND Journal of Economics, 18(1):109–
123, 1987.
[10] J. R. Anderson. The adaptive character of thought. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ, 1990.
[11] R. D. Luce. Individual choice behavior. John Wiley, New York, 1959.
[12] R. N. Shepard. Stimulus and response generalization: A stochastic model relating generalization to
distance in psychological space. Psychometrika, 22:325–345, 1957.
[13] D. McFadden. Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behavior. In P. Zarembka, editor, Frontiers
in Econometrics. Academic Press, New York, 1973.
[14] D. Revelt and K. E. Train. Mixed logit with repeated choices: Households’ choices of appliance efﬁciency
level. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 80(4):647–657, 1998.
[15] R. M. Neal. Probabilistic inference using Markov chain Monte Carlo methods. Technical Report CRG-
TR-93-1, University of Toronto, 1993.
[16] N. D. Goodman, C. L. Baker, E. Baraff Bonawitz, V. K. Mansinghka, A. Gopnik, H. Wellman, L. Schulz,
and J. B. Tenenbaum. Intuitive theories of mind: A rational approach to false belief. In 28th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 2006.

8

