Psychiatry: insights into depression through
normative decision-making models

Quentin JM Huys1,2,∗ Joshua T Vogelstein3,∗ and Peter Dayan2, ∗
1Center for Theoretical Neuroscience, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA
2Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, University College London, London, WC1N 3AR, UK
3 Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore MD 21231, USA

Abstract

Decision making lies at the very heart of many psychiatric diseases. It is also a
central theoretical concern in a wide variety of ﬁelds and ha s undergone detailed,
in-depth, analyses. We take as an example Major Depressive Disorder (MDD),
applying insights from a Bayesian reinforcement learning framework. We focus
on anhedonia and helplessness. Helplessness —a core element
in the conceptual-
izations of MDD that has lead to major advances in its treatment, pharmacolog-
ical and neurobiological understanding—is formalized as a s
imple prior over the
outcome entropy of actions in uncertain environments. Anhedonia, which is an
equally fundamental aspect of the disease, is related to the effective reward size.
These formulations allow for the design of speci ﬁc tasks to m easure anhedonia
and helplessness behaviorally. We show that these behavioral measures capture
explicit, questionnaire-based cognitions. We also provide evidence that these tasks
may allow classi ﬁcation of subjects into healthy and MDD gro ups based purely
on a behavioural measure and avoiding any verbal reports.

There are strong ties between decision making and psychiatry, with maladaptive decisions and be-
haviors being very prominent in people with psychiatric disorders. Depression is classically seen as
following life events such as divorces and job losses. Longitudinal studies, however, have revealed
that a signi ﬁcant fraction of the stressors associated with depression do in fact follow MDD onset,
and that they are likely due to maladaptive behaviors prominent in MDD (Kendler et al., 1999).
Clinically effective ’talking’ therapies for MDD such as cognitive and dialectical behavior therapies
(DeRubeis et al., 1999; Bortolotti et al., 2008; Gotlib and Hammen, 2002; Power, 2005) explicitly
concentrate on altering patients’ maladaptive behaviors and decision making processes.

Decision making is a promising avenue into psychiatry for at least two more reasons. First, it
offers powerful analytical tools. Control problems related to decision making are prevalent in a
huge diversity of ﬁelds, ranging from ecology to economics,
computer science and engineering.
These ﬁelds have produced well-founded and thoroughly char acterized frameworks within which
many issues in decision making can be framed. Here, we will focus on framing issues identi ﬁed in
psychiatric settings within a normative decision making framework.

Its second major strength comes from its relationship to neurobiology, and particularly those neuro-
modulatory systems which are powerfully affected by all major clinically effective pharmacothera-
pies in psychiatry. The understanding of these systems has beneﬁted signi ﬁcantly from theoretical
accounts of optimal control such as reinforcement learning (Montague et al., 1996; Kapur and Rem-
ington, 1996; Smith et al., 1999; Yu and Dayan, 2005; Dayan and Yu, 2006). Such accounts may be
useful to identify in more speci ﬁc terms the roles of the neur omodulators in psychiatry (Smith et al.,
2004; Williams and Dayan, 2005; Moutoussis et al., 2008; Dayan and Huys, 2008).

∗ qhuys@cantab.net, joshuav@jhu.edu, dayan@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk; www.gatsby.ucl.ac.uk/∼qhuys/pub.html

1

Master

Yoked

Control

Figure 1: The learned helplessness (LH) paradigm. Three sets of rats are used in a sequence of
two tasks. In the ﬁrst task, rats are exposed to escapable or i nescapable shocks. Shocks come on at
random times. The master rat is given escapable shocks: it can switch off the shock by performing
an action, usually turning a wheel mounted in front of it. The yoked rat is exposed to precisely the
same shocks as the master rat, i.e its shocks are terminated when the master rat terminates the shock.
Thus its shocks are inescapable, there is nothing it can do itself to terminate them. A third set of rats
is not exposed to shocks. Then, all three sets of rats are exposed to a shuttlebox escape task. Shocks
again come on at random times, and rats have to shuttle to the other side of the box to terminate
the shock. Only yoked rats fail to acquire the escape response. Yoked rats generally fail to acquire
a wide variety of instrumental behaviours, either determined by reward or, as here, by punishment
contingencies.

This paper represents an initial attempt at validating this approach experimentally. We will frame
core notions of MDD in a reinforcement learning framework and use it to design behavioral decision
making experiments. More speci ﬁcally, we will concentrate on two concepts central to current
thinking about MDD: anhedonia and learned helplessness (LH, Maier and Seligman 1976; Maier
and Watkins 2005). We formulate helplessness parametrically as prior beliefs on aspects of decision
trees, and anhedonia as the effective reward size. This allows us to use choice behavior to infer the
degree to which subjects’ behavioral choices are characterized by either of these. For validation,
we correlate the parameters inferred from subjects’ behavior with standard, questionnaire-based
measures of hopelessness and anhedonia, and ﬁnally use the i nferred parameters alone to attempt to
recover the diagnostic classi ﬁcation.

1 Core concepts: helplessness and anhedonia

The basic LH paradigm is explained in ﬁgure 1. Its importance is manifold: the effect of inescapable
shock on subsequent learning is sensitive to most classes of clinically effective antidepressants; it
has arguably been a motivation framework for the development of the main talking therapies for
depression (cognitive behavioural therapy, Williams (1992), it has motivated the development of
further, yet more speci ﬁc animal models (Willner, 1997), an d it has been the basis of very speci ﬁc
research into the cognitive basis of depression (Peterson et al., 1993).

Behavioral control is the central concept in LH: yoked and master rat do not differ in terms of the
amount of shock (stress) they have experienced, only in terms of the behavioural control over it. It
is not a standard notion in reinforcement learning, and there are several ways one could translate
the concept into RL terms. At a simple level, there is intuitively more behavioural control if, when
repeating one action, the same outcome occurs again and again, than if this were not true. Thus, at a
very ﬁrst level, control might be related to the outcome entr opy of actions (see Maier and Seligman
1976 for an early formulation). Of course, this is too simple. If all available actions deterministically
led to the same outcome, the agent has very little control. Finally, if one were able to achieve all
outcomes except for the one one cares about (in the rats’ case switching off or avoiding the shock),
we would again not say that there is much control (see Huys (2007); Huys and Dayan (2007) for a
more detailed discussion). Despite its obvious limitations, we will here concentrate on the simplest
notion for reasons of mathematical expediency.

2

)
n
w
o
n
k
a
 
 
 
d
r
 
a
w
e
r
(
P

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

Predictive Distributions

2

0

1

2

3

4

5

1

2
3
4
Reward

5

0.5

)
n
w
o
n
k
n
u
a
(
Q
−
)
n
w
o
−0.5
n
k
a
(
Q

0

Exploration vs Exploitation
1

Choose blue slot machine

−1

Choose orange slot machine
1
2
3
4
5
High control
Tree depth
Low control

Figure 2: Effect of γ on predictions, Q-values and exploration behaviour. Assume a slot machine
(blue) has been chosen ﬁve times, with possible rewards 1-5, and that reward 2 has been obtained
twice, and reward 4 three times (inset in left panel). Left: Predictive distribution for a prior with
negative γ (low control) in light gray, and large γ (extensive control) in dark gray. We see that, if
the agent believes he has much control (and outcome distributions have low entropy), the predictive
distribution puts all mass on the observations. Right: Assume now the agent gets up to 5 more pulls
(tree depth 1-5) between the blue slot machine and a new, orange slot machine. The orange slot
machine’s predictive distribution is ﬂat as it has never bee n tried, and its expected value is therefore
3. The plot shows the difference between the values for the two slot machines. First consider the
agent only has one more pull to take. In this case, independently of the priors about control, the
agent will choose the blue machine, because it is just slightly better than average. Note though that
the difference is more pronounced if the agent has a high control prior. But things change if the agent
has two or more choices. Now, it is worth trying out the new machine if the agent has a high-control
prior. For in that case, if the new machine turns out to yield a large reward on the ﬁrst try, it is likely
to do so again for the second and subsequent times. Thus, the prior about control determines the
exploration bonus.

The second central concept in current conceptions of MDD is that of reward sensitivity. Anhedonia,
an inability to enjoy previously enjoyable things, is one of two symptoms necessary for the diagnosis
of depression (American Psychiatric Association, 1994). A number of tasks in the literature have
attempted to measure reward sensitivity behaviourally. While these generally concur in ﬁnding
decreased reward sensitivity in subjects with MDD, these results need further clari ﬁcation. Some
studies show interactions between reward and punishment sensitivities with respect to MDD, but
important aspects of the tasks are not clearly understood. For instance, Henriques et al. (1994);
Henriques and Davidson (2000) show decreased resonsiveness of MDD subjects to rewards, but
equally show decreased resonsiveness of healthy subjects to punishments. Pizzagalli et al. (2005)
introduced an asymmetrically rewarded perceptual discrimination task and show that the rate of
change of the response bias is anticorrelated with subjects’ anhedonic symptoms. Exactly how
decreased reward responsivity can account for this is at pressent not clear.

Great care has to be taken to disentangle these two concepts. Anhedonia and helplessness both
provide good reasons for not taking an action: either because the reinforcements associated with the
action are insufﬁcient (anhedonia), or because the outcome
is not judged a likely result of taking
some particular action (if actions are thought to have large outcome entropy).

2 A Bayesian formulation of control

We consider a scenario where subjects have no knowledge of the outcome distributions of actions,
but rather learn about them. This means that their prior beliefs about the outcome distributions are
not overwhelmed by the likelihood of observations, and may thus have measurable effects on their
action choices. In terms of RL, this means that agents do not know the decision tree of the problem
they face. Control is formulated as a prior distribution on the outcome distributions, and thereby as
a prior distribution on the decision trees.

The concentration parameter α of a Dirichlet process can very simply parametrise entropy, and,
if used as a prior, allow for very efﬁcient updates of the pred ictive distributions of actions. Let
us assume we have actions A which have as outcomes rewards R, and keep count Nt (r, a) =

3

Pk:k<t;ak=a δr,rk of the number of times a particular reward r ∈ R was observed for each action
a ∈ A, where t is the number of times that action has been chosen, rt is the reward on the tth trial
and δ is the Kronecker delta. The predictive distribution for action a is then

B (r) +

Nt (r, a)

P (r|Nt , a, α) =

1
α
α + Nt (a)
α + Nt (a)
Here, B (r) is the base distribution, which we assume is ﬂat, and Nt (a) = Pr Nt (r, a) is the
number of times action a was chosen up to trial t. Thus, the ﬁrst time an action is chosen, we draw
a sample from B (r). For α = 0, we then always draw that very same sample again. For α = ∞, we
keep drawing from the same ﬂat outcome distribution. Thus, α very simply determines the entropy
of the actions’ outcome distribution. To match parametric values onto control more intuitively, let
γ = − log(α) be the control parameter.
The action choice problem is now to choose action a = argmaxa Q(a|N ), where the Q values are
deﬁned by the Bellman equation of our problem:

(1)

Qt (a|Nt , γ ) = X
r

p(r|Nt , a, γ )[r + argmax
a′

Qt (a′ |Nt+1 (r), γ )]

(2)

where Nt+1 (r) is the count including the (anticipated) reward r . The effect of the parameter γ on Q
values is illustrated in Figure 2. One can now infer the maximum likelihood (ML) parameters of the
prior by writing the probability of the subject’s observed actions as a standard softmaxed version of
the Q values:

{ˆγ , ˆβ }M L = argmax
γ ,β

Y
t
exp(βQt (a|Nt , γ ))
Pa′ exp(βQt (a′ |Nt , γ ))
where we have introduced a second parameter β , which is either the softmax inverse temperature,
or, alternatively and equivalently, the size of the rewards (the maximum of R and β are not both
inferable from action observations only).

p(at |Nt , γ , β ) =

p(at |Nt , γ , β )

where

(3)

(4)

Simulations of the inference revealed that the parameters γ and β , our inferred reward sensitivity and
prior on control, were correlated. To alleviate this problem, subjects were additionally given a reward
sensitivity task which was interleaved with the control task (see below for the task descriptions).
The structure of the reward sensitivity task is such that Q values are correctly deﬁned by a Rescorla-
Wagner (RW) learning rule:

QRW
t

(a) = (1 − ǫ)QRW
t−1 (a) + ǫrt

(5)

(a) is the Q value of action a at choice t, ǫ is the learning rate, and actions probabilities
where QRW
t
again deﬁned via softmax with a parameter β as in equation 4. Note, importantly, i) that this is
not dependent on γ , the prior belief about control and ii) that unlike equation 2 above, this is a
’model-free’ algorithm that does not look ahead and thus does not take anticipated rewards into
account). Combining inference in the two tasks (sharing β between them), allows us to use the
reward sensitivity task as a prior on β for the control task and to eliminate the correlation.

2.1 Task and subjects

Control task: The effects illustrated in ﬁgure 2 are easily elicited in a si mple behavioral task.
Subjects are told to imagine that they are in a large casino, and will be dropped randomly in each of
100 rooms. In each room, they will get to choose between slot machines. At ﬁrst, they see only one
slot machine, which they have to choose. Next, they get to choose between two slot machines. A new
machine is presented whenever all machines on the screen have been tried. Thus, the exploratory
drive is always maintained with one unexplored slot machine. Subjects get 8 choices per room, and
thus get to try a maximum of 8 machines once in each room. Subjects are informed that outcomes
for each slot machine are between 0 and 9 points. Overall, subjects are thus always kept in the
dark about the true outcome distribution of any one slot machine. Thus, their prior beliefs become
relevant. For healthy control subjects, one room was chosen randomly and the total number of points

4

p

0.5

0.05
1

)
e
c
i
o
h
c
 
t
a
e
p
e
r
(
P

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

MDD x outcome p=0.0029359

MDD x outcome p=7.6434e−05

2
6
4
Outcome obtained once

8

0

2
6
4
Outcome obtained twice

8

Figure 3: Repeat modulation. Bottom plots: Probability of choosing a slot machine again given that
it has just yielded a particular outcome. Control subjects are in gray and MDD subjects in red (all
individuals as dots, means ± 1 std. err. as bars; red dots on the right of bars, gray dots on the left of
bars). Top plots: uncorrected p-values comparing the two groups for every individual outcome. Left
panel: after observing a particular outcome once, Right panel: after observing the same outcome
on a particular machine twice in a row. The p-values at the top indicate the ANOVA interaction of
outcome size with group. Thus, we see here that subjects with MDD are more likely to stick with
a bad machine, and more likely to move away from a good machine. The same result is observed
when ﬁtting sigmoids to each subject and comparing the infer red parameters (data not shown).

earned in that room determined the payment (1 point = 1 US$, minimum 10US$, maximum 50US$).
MDD subjects were given the same instructions, but, for ethical reasons, could not be paid.
Reward sensitivity task: Subjects chose repeatedly (300 times) between two stacks of cards with
probabilistic binary outcomes. The underlying probabilities of a reward changed as a (squashed)
Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process. This task was thus accurately described by a standard Rescorla-
Wagner (RW) rule (Daw et al., 2006).
Questionnaire measures: Finally, each subject ﬁlled out two questionnaires: the Bec k Helplessness
Score (BHS), and the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) which are standard questionnaire measures
of hopelessness and anhedonia respectively. We extracted the anhedonic subcomponent, BDIa, as
the sum of responses on questions 4, 12, 15 and 21 of the BDI.
Subjects: We recruited 17 healthy control subjects from the community. 15 subjects with MDD
were recruited as part of an ongoing treatment study, and asked to take the behavioural test while
waiting to see the psychiatrists. All subjects were given a full Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-
IV (First et al., 2002a,b). All MDD subjects met criteria for a current major depressive episode.
Three subjects had additionally a diagnosis of either Panic Disorder (2) or Bipolar Disorder II (1).
All the healthy control subjects had neither a present psychiatric disorder, nor a history thereof. All
procedures were approved by the New York State Institue of Psychiatry Institutional Review Board.
The subjects were matched for sex and educational level, but not for age. We thus included age
in our model formulations to exclude its effects as a nuisance variable. The depressed sample was
older, but throughout, the effects of age correlate negatively with those of depression.

3 Results

3.1 Reward sensitivity

Preliminary analysis: Repeat modulation, a very simple proxy measure of choices, provides a ﬁrst
glimpse at the effects of depression on the ﬁrst task. Figure 3 shows the probability with which
subjects chose a slot machine again after having received outcomes 0-9. As groups, MDD subjects
both avoid bad and exploit good machines less. Nearly half the subjects with MDD show very little
modulation with rewards. As a group, MDD subjects appear less sensitive to the reward structure in
the ﬁrst task.

5

2
0
−2
−4

2

0

−2

Constant factor

First−order term

0.1

0

-0.1

ζβ

ζε

θβ

θε

Figure 4: ML inferred values for constant and rel-
evant ﬁrst-order factors. The green lines are the
standard deviations around the ML value, and the
red represent three times that. Thus, while BDI is
related to the effective reward size β , it is not re-
lated to the learning rate ǫ. Note that here the effect
of age has already been accounted for.

Constant factor

First−order term

0

−0.2

−0.4

χγ1 χγ2 θβ

ζ γ1 ζ γ2 ζ β

Figure 5: ML inferred values for the constant the
relevant ﬁrst-order factors as in the previous ﬁgure.
The green lines are the standard deviation around
the ML values and the red represent three times
that. Thus, the effect of the BHS on control is
captured by γ that of BDIa on reward sensitivity
is captured by β as predicted.

Reward sensitivity: The main hypothesis with respect to reward sensitivity is that subjects’ empir-
ically observed reward sensitivity β in equation 5 is inversely related to their expressed anhedonia,
BDIa, in the questionnaires. We can build this into the action choice model by parametrising β in the
QRW value (equation 5) above explicitly as a function of the questionnaire anhedonia score BDI a:
β (BDI a, AGE ) = θβ BDI a + cβ AGE + ζβ
If the hypothesis is true and subjects with higher BDIa scores do indeed care less about rewards, we
should observe that θβ < 0. Here, we included a regressor for the AGE as that was a confounding
variable in our subject sample. Furthermore, if it is true that anhedonia, as expressed by the ques-
tionnaire, relates to reward sensitivity speci ﬁcally, we s hould be able to write a similar regression
for the learning rate ǫ (from equation 5)
ǫ(BDI a, AGE ) = θǫBDI a + cǫAGE + ζǫ
but ﬁnd that θǫ is not different from zero. Figure 4 shows the ML values for the parameters of
interest (emphasized in blue in the equations) and conﬁrms t hat people who express higher levels
of anhedonia do indeed show less reward sensitivity, but do not differ in terms of learning rate. If
it were the case that subjects with higher BDIa score were just less attentive to the task, one might
also expect an effect of BDIa on learning rate.

3.2 Control

Validation: The control task is new, and we ﬁrst need to ascertain that sub jects were indeed sensitive
to main features of the task. We thus ﬁt both a RW-learning rul e (as in the previous section, but
adjusted for the varying number of available actions), and the full control model. Importantly, both
these models have two parameters, but only the full control model has a notion of outcome entropy,
and evaluations a tree. The chance probability of subjects’ actions was 0.37, meaning that, on
average, there were just under three machines on the screen. The probability of the actions under
the RW-learning rule was better at 0.48, and that of the full control model 0.54. These differences
are highly signi ﬁcant as the total number of choices is 29600 . Thus, we conclude that subjects were
indeed sensitive to the manipulation of outcome entropy, and that they did look ahead in a tree.
Prior belief about control: Applying the procedure from the previous task to the main task, we
write the main parameters of equations 2 and 4 as functions of the questionnaire measures and infer
linear parameters:
γ1 (BDI a, BH S, age) = χγ 1BH S + θγ 1BDI a + cγ 1AGE + ζγ 1
γ2 (BDI a, BH S, age) = χγ 2BH S + θγ 2BDI a + cγ 2AGE + ζγ 2
β (BDI a, BH S, age) = χβ BH S + θβ BDI a + cβ AGE + ζβ
Importantly, because the BDIa scores and the BHS scores are correlated in our sample (they tend to
be large for the subjects with MDD), we include the cross-terms (θγ 1 , θγ 2 , χγ ), as we are interested
in the speci ﬁc effects of BDIa on β , as before, and of BHS on γ .

6

γ
 
l
o
r
t
n
o
c

3

2

1

0

−1

−2

83% correct
69% sensitivity
94% specificity

2

4
12
10
8
6
reward sensitivity  β

14

16

Figure 6: Classi ﬁcation. Controls are
shown as black dots, and depressed sub-
jects as red crosses. The blue line is a
linear classi ﬁer. Thus, the patients and
controls can be approximately classi ﬁed
purely on the basis of behaviour.

We here infer and display two separate values γ1 and γ2 . These correspond to the level of control
in the ﬁrst and the second half of the experiment. In fact, to p arallel the LH experiments better, the
slot machines in the ﬁrst 50 rooms were actually very noisy (l ow true γ ), which means that subjects
were here exposed to low levels of control just like the yoked rats in the original experiment. In the
second half of the experiment on the other hand, slot machines tended to be quite reliable (high true
γ ).

Figure 5 shows again the ML values for the parameters of interest (emphasized in blue in the equa-
tions). Again, we ﬁnd that our parameter estimate are very si gni ﬁcantly different from zero ( > three
standard deviations).

The effect of the BHS score on the prior beliefs about control γ is much stronger in the second half
than of the experiment in the ﬁrst half, i.e. the effect of BHS on the prior belief about control is
particularly prominent when subjects are in a high-control environment and have previously been
exposed to a low-control environment. This is an interesting parallel to the learned helplessness
experiments in animals.

3.3 Classi ﬁcation

Finally we combine the two tasks. We integrate out the learning rate ǫ, which we had found not be
related to the questionnaire measures (c.f. ﬁgure 4), and us e the distribution over β from the ﬁrst
task as a prior distribution on β for the second task. We also put weak priors on γ and infer both β
and γ for the second task on a subject-by-subject basis. Figure 6 shows the posterior values for γ
and β for MDD and healthy subjects and the ability of a linear classi ﬁer to classify them.

4 Discussion

In this paper, we have attempted to provide a speci ﬁc formula tion of core psychiatric concepts in
reinforcement learning terms, i.e. hopelessness as a prior belief about controllability, and anhedonia
as reward sensitivity. We have brieﬂy explained how we expec t these formulations to have effect
in a behavioural situation, have presented a behavioral task explicitly designed to be sensitive to
our formulations, and shown that people’s verbal expression of hopelessness and anhedonia do have
speci ﬁc behavioral impacts. Subjects who express anhedoni a display insensitivity to rewards and
those expressing hopelessness behave as if they had prior beliefs that outcome distributions of ac-
tions (slot machines) are very broad. Finally, we have shown that these purely behavioural measures
are also predictive of their psychiatric status, in that we were able to classify patients and healthy
controls purely on the basis of performance.

Several aspects of this work are novel. There have been previous attempts to map aspects of psy-
chiatric dysfunction onto speci ﬁc parametrizations (Cohe n et al., 1996; Smith et al., 2004; Williams
and Dayan, 2005; Moutoussis et al., 2008), but we believe that our work represents the ﬁrst attempt
to a) apply it to MDD; b) make formal predictions about subject behavior c) present strong evi-
dence linking anhedonia speci ﬁcally to reward insensitivi
ty across two tasks d) combine tasks to
tease helplessness and anhedonia apart and e) to use the behavioral inferences for classi ﬁcation. The
latter point is particularly important, as it will determine any potential clinical signi ﬁcance (Veiel,
1997). In the future, rather than cross-validating with respect to say DSM-IV criteria, it may also be
important to validate measures such as ours in their own right in longitudinal studies.

7

Several important caveats do remain. First, the populations are not fully matched for age. We in-
cluded age as an additional regressor and found all results to be robust. Secondly, only the healthy
subjects were remunerated. However, repeating the analyses presented using only the MDD subjects
yields the same results (data not shown). Thirdly, we have not yet fully mirrored the LH experiments.
We have so far only tested the transfer from a low-control environment to a high-control environ-
ment. To make statements like those in animal learned helplessness experiments, the transfer from
high-control to low-control environments will need to be examined, too. Fourth, the notion of con-
trol we have used is very simple, and more complex notions should certainly be tested (see Dayan
and Huys 2008). Fifth, and maybe most importantly, we have so far only attempted to classify MDD
and healthy subjects, and can thus not yet make any statements about the speci ﬁcity of these ef-
fects with respect to MDD. Finally, it will be important to replicate these results independently, and
possibly in a different modality. Nevertheless, we believe these results to be very encouraging.
Acknowledgments: This work would not have been possible without the help of Sarah Hollingsworth Lisanby,
Kenneth Miller and Ramin V. Parsey. We would also like to thank Nathaniel Daw and Hanneke EM Den
Ouden and Ren ´e Hen for invaluable discussions. Support for this work was provided by the Gatsby Charitable
Foundation (PD), a UCL Bogue Fellowship and the Swartz Foundation (QH) and a Columbia University startup
grant to Kenneth Miller.
References
American Psychiatric Association (1994). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. American Psychiatric
Association Press.
Bortolotti, B., Menchetti, M., Bellini, F., Montaguti, M. B., and Berardi, D. (2008). Psychological interventions for major
depression in primary care: a meta-analytic review of randomized controlled trials. Gen Hosp Psychiatry, 30(4):293 –302.
Cohen, J. D., Braver, T. S., and O’Reilly, R. C. (1996). A computational approach to prefrontal cortex, cognitive control and
schizophrenia: recent developments and current challenges. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci, 351(1346):1515 –1527.
Daw, N. D., O’Doherty, J. P., Dayan, P., Seymour, B., and Dolan, R. J. (2006). Cortical substrates for exploratory decisions
in humans. Nature, 441(7095):876 –879.
Dayan, P. and Huys, Q. J. M. (2008). Serotonin, inhibition, and negative mood. PLoS Comput Biol, 4(2):e4.
Dayan, P. and Yu, A. J. (2006). Phasic norepinephrine: a neural interrupt signal for unexpected events. Network, 17(4):335 –
350.
DeRubeis, R. J., Gelfand, L. A., Tang, T. Z., and Simons, A. D. (1999). Medications versus cognitive behavior therapy for
severely depressed outpatients: mega-analysis of four randomized comparisons. Am J Psychiatry, 156(7):1007 –1013.
First, M. B., Spitzer, R. L., Gibbon, M., and Williams, J. B. (2002a). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV-TR Axis
I Disorders, Research Version, Non-Patient Edition. (SCID-I/NP). Biometrics Research, New York State Psychiatric
Institute.
First, M. B., Spitzer, R. L., Gibbon, M., and Williams, J. B. (2002b). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV-TR Axis I
Disorders, Research Version, Patient Edition. (SCID-I/P). Biometrics Research, New York State Psychiatric Institute.
Gotlib, I. H. and Hammen, C. L., editors (2002). Handbook of Depression. The Guilford Press.
Henriques, J. B. and Davidson, R. J. (2000). Decreased responsiveness to reward in depression. Cognition and Emotion,
14(5):711 –24.
Henriques, J. B., Glowacki, J. M., and Davidson, R. J. (1994). Reward fails to alter response bias in depression. J Abnorm
Psychol, 103(3):460 –6.
Huys, Q. J. M. (2007). Reinforcers and control. Towards a computational ætiology
Computational Neuroscience Unit, UCL, University of London.
Huys, Q. J. M. and Dayan, P. (2007). A bayesian formulation of behavioral control. Under Review, 0:00.
Kapur, S. and Remington, G. (1996). Serotonin-dopamine interaction and its relevance to schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry,
153(4):466 –76.
Kendler, K. S., Karkowski, L. M., and Prescott, C. A. (1999). Causal relationship between stressful life events and the onset
of major depression. Am. J. Psychiatry, 156:837 –41.
Maier, S. and Seligman, M. (1976). Learned Helplessness: Theory and Evidence. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 105(1):3 –46.
Maier, S. F. and Watkins, L. R. (2005). Stressor controllability and learned helplessness: the roles of the dorsal raphe nucleus,
serotonin, and corticotropin-releasing factor. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev., 29(4-5):829 –41.
Montague, P. R., Dayan, P., and Sejnowski, T. J. (1996). A framework for mesencephalic dopamine systems based on
predictive hebbian learning. J. Neurosci., 16(5):1936 –47.
Moutoussis, M., Bentall, R. P., Williams, J., and Dayan, P. (2008). A temporal difference account of avoidance learning.
Network, 19(2):137 –160.
Peterson, C., Maier, S. F., and Seligman, M. E. P. (1993). Learned Helplessness: A theory for the age of personal control.
OUP, Oxford, UK.
Pizzagalli, D. A., Jahn, A. L., and O’Shea, J. P. (2005). Toward an objective characterization of an anhedonic phenotype: a
signal-detection approach. Biol Psychiatry, 57(4):319 –327.
Power, M., editor (2005). Mood Disorders: A Handbook of Science and Practice. John Wiley and Sons, paperback edition.
Smith, A., Li, M., Becker, S., and Kapur, S. (2004). A model of antipsychotic action in conditioned avoidance: a computa-
tional approach. Neuropsychopharm., 29(6):1040 –9.
Smith, K. A., Morris, J. S., Friston, K. J., Cowen, P. J., and Dolan, R. J. (1999). Brain mechanisms associated with depressive
relapse and associated cognitive impairment following acute tryptophan depletion. Br. J. Psychiatry, 174:525 –9.
Veiel, H. O. F. (1997). A preliminary pro ﬁle of neuropsycholo gical deﬁcits associated with major depression.
J. Clin. Exp.
Neuropsychol., 19:587 –603.
Williams, J. and Dayan, P. (2005).
a biological account of attention-
learning, and impulsivity:
Dopamine,
deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder.
J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol, 15(2):160 –79; discussion 157 –9.
Williams, J. M. G. (1992). The psychological treatment of depression. Routledge.
Willner, P. (1997). Validity, reliability and utility of the chronic mild stress model of depression: a 10-year review and
evaluation. Psychopharm, 134:319 –29.
Yu, A. J. and Dayan, P. (2005). Uncertainty, neuromodulation, and attention. Neuron, 46(4):681 –692.

of depression. PhD thesis, Gatsby

8

