Neuronal Fiber Delineation in Area of Edema
from Diffusion Weighted MRI

∗
Ofer Pasternak
School of Computer Science
Tel-Aviv University
Tel-Aviv, ISRAEL 69978
oferpas@post.tau.ac.il

Nathan Intrator
School of Computer Science
Tel-Aviv University
nin@post.tau.ac.il

Nir Sochen
Department of Applied Mathematics
Tel-Aviv University
sochen@post.tau.ac.il

Yaniv Assaf
Department of Neurobiochemistry
Faculty of Life Science
Tel-Aviv University
assafyan@post.tau.ac.il

Abstract

Diffusion Tensor Magnetic Resonance Imaging (DT-MRI) is a non inva-
sive method for brain neuronal ﬁbers delineation. Here we show a mod-
iﬁcation for DT-MRI that allows delineation of neuronal ﬁbers which
are inﬁltrated by edema. We use the Muliple Tensor Variational (MTV)
framework which replaces the diffusion model of DT-MRI with a mul-
tiple component model and ﬁts it to the signal attenuation with a vari-
ational regularization mechanism.
In order to reduce free water con-
tamination we estimate the free water compartment volume fraction in
each voxel, remove it, and then calculate the anisotropy of the remaining
compartment. The variational framework was applied on data collected
with conventional clinical parameters, containing only six diffusion di-
rections. By using the variational framework we were able to overcome
the highly ill posed ﬁtting. The results show that we were able to ﬁnd
ﬁbers that were not found by DT-MRI.

1 Introduction

Diffusion weighted Magnetic Resonance Imaging (DT-MRI) enables the measurement of
the apparent water self-diffusion along a speciﬁed direction [1]. Using a series of Diffusion
Weighted Images (DWIs) DT-MRI can extract quantitative measures of water molecule
diffusion anisotropy which characterize tissue microstructure [2]. Such measures are in
particular useful for the segmentation of neuronal ﬁbers from other brain tissue which then
allows a noninvasive delineation and visualization of major brain neuronal ﬁber bundles in
vivo [3]. Based on the assumptions that each voxel can be represented by a single diffusion
compartment and that the diffusion within this compartment has a Gaussian distribution
http://www.cs.tau.ac.il/∼oferpas
∗

DT-MRI states the relation between the signal attenuation, E , and the diffusion tensor, D ,
as follows [4, 5, 6]:

= exp(−bqT
k Dqk ) ,

(1)

E (qk ) = A(qk )
A(0)
where A(qk ) is the DWI for the k’th applied diffusion gradient direction qk . The notation
A(0) is for the non weighted image and b is a constant re ﬂecting the experimental diffu-
sion weighting [2]. D is a second order tensor, i.e., a 3 × 3 positive semideﬁnite matrix,
that requires at least 6 DWIs from different non-collinear applied gradient directions to
uniquely determine it. The symmetric diffusion tensor has a spectral decomposition for
three eigenvectors U a and three positive eigenvalues λa . The relation between the eigen-
(cid:1)
values determines the diffusion anisotropy using measures such as Fractional Anisotropy
(FA) [5]:

3((λ1 − (cid:1)D(cid:2))2 + (λ2 − (cid:1)D(cid:2))2 + (λ3 − (cid:1)D(cid:2))2 )
(2)
2(λ2
1 + λ2
2 + λ2
3 )
where (cid:1)D(cid:2) = (λ1 + λ2 + λ3 )/3. FA is relatively high in neuronal ﬁber bundles (white
matter), where the cylindrical geometry of ﬁbers causes the diffusion perpendicular to
the ﬁbers be much smaller than parallel to them. Other brain tissues, such as gray mat-
ter and Cerebro-Spinal Fluid (CSF), are less conﬁned with diffusion direction and exhibit
isotropic diffusion. In cases of partial volume where neuronal ﬁbers reside other tissue
type in the same voxel, or present complex architecture, the diffusion has no longer a sin-
gle pronounced orientation and therefore the FA value of the ﬁtted tensor is decreased. The
decreased FA values causes errors in segmentation and in any proceeding ﬁber analysis.

F A =

,

In this paper we focus on the case where partial volume occurs when ﬁber bundles are inﬁl-
trated with edema. Edema might occur in response to brain trauma, or surrounding a tumor.
The brain tissue accumulate water which creates pressure and might change the ﬁber archi-
tecture, or inﬁltrate it. Since the edema consists mostly of relatively free diffusing water
molecules, the diffusion attenuation increases and the anisotropy decreases. We chose to
reduce the effect of edema by changing the diffusion model to a dual compartment model,
assuming an isotropic compartment added to a tensor compartment.

2 Theory

The method we offer is based on the dual compartment model which was already demon-
strated as able to reduce CSF contamination [7], where it required a large number of diffu-
sion measurement with different diffusion times. Here we require the conventional DT-MRI
data of only six diffusion measurement, and apply it on the edema case.

2.1 The Dual Compartment Model

The dual compartment model is described as follows:

E (qk ) = f exp(−bqT
k D1 qk ) + (1 − f ) exp(−bD2 ) .
The diffusion tensor for the tensor compartment is denoted by D1 , and the diffusion coefﬁ-
cient of the isotropic water compartment is denoted by D2 . The compartments have relative
volume of f and 1− f . Finding the best ﬁtting parameters D1 , D2 and f is highly ill-posed,
especially in the case of six measurement, where for any arbitrarily chosen isotropic com-
partment there could be found a tensor compartment which exactly ﬁts the data.

(3)

Figure 1: The initialization scheme. In addition to the DWI data, MTV uses the T2 image
to initialize f . The initial orientation for the tensor compartment are those that DT-MRI
calculated.

2.2 The Variational Framework

In order to stabilize the ﬁtting process we chose to use the Multiple Tensor Variational
(MTV) framework [8] which was previously used to resolve partial volume caused by
complex ﬁber architecture [9], and to reduce CSF contamination in cases of hydrocephalus
[10]. We note that the dual compartment model is a special case of the more general mul-
tiple tensor model, where the number of the compartments is restricted to 2 and one of the
compartments is restricted to equal eigenvalues (isotropy). Therefore the MTV framework
adapted for separation of ﬁber compartments from edema is composed of the following
(cid:3)
(cid:5)
(cid:2)
d(cid:4)
functional, whose minima should provide the wanted diffusion parameters:
(E (qk ) − ˆE (qk ))2 + φ(|∇U 1
i |)
S (f , D1 , D2 ) =
Ω
k=1
The notation ˆE is for the observed diffusion signal attenuation and E is calculated using
(cid:6)
(3) for d different acquisition directions. Ω is the image domain with 3D axis (x, y , z ),
|∇I | =
∂ z )2 is deﬁned as the vector gradient norm. The notation U 1
∂ y )2 + ( ∂ I
∂x )2 + ( ∂ I
( ∂ I
i
stands for the principal eigenvector of the i’th diffusion tensor. The ﬁxed parameters α is
(cid:6)
set to keep the solution closer to the observed diffusion signal. The function φ is a diffusion
ﬂow function, which controls the regularization behavior. Here we chose to use φi (s) =
1 + s2
which lead to anisotropic diffusion-like ﬂow while preserving discontinuities
K 2
i
[11]. The regularized ﬁtting allows the identiﬁcation of smoothed ﬁber compartments and
reduces noise. The minimum of (4) solves the Euler-Lagrange equations, and can be found
by the gradient descent scheme.

dΩ .

α

(4)

2.3 Initialization Scheme

Since the functional space is highly irregular (not enough measurements), the minimization
process requires initial guess (ﬁgure 1), which is as close as possible to the global mini-
mum. In order to apriori estimate the relative volume of the isotropic compartment we used
a normalized diffusion non-weighted image, where high contrast correlates to larger ﬂuid
volume. In order to apriori estimate the parameters of D1 we used the result of conventional
DT-MRI ﬁtting on the original data. The DT-MRI results were spectrally decomposed and
the eigenvectors were used as initial guess for the eigenvectors of D1 . The initial guess for

the eigenvalues of D1 were set to λ1 = 1.5, λ2 = λ3 = 0.4.

3 methods

We demonstrate how partial volume of neuronal ﬁber and edema can be reduced by apply-
ing the modiﬁed MTV framework on a brain slice taken from a patient with sever edema
surrounding a brain tumor. MRI was performed on a 1.5T MRI scanner (GE, Milwau-
kee). DT-MRI experiments were performed using a diffusion-weighted spin-echo echo-
planar-imaging (DWI-EPI) pulse sequence. The experimental parameters were as follows:
T R/T E = 10000/98ms, ∆/δ = 31/25ms, b = 1000s/mm2 with six diffusion gra-
dient directions. 48 slices with thickness of 3mm and no gap were acquired covering the
whole brain with FOV of 240mm2 and matrix of 128x128. Number of averages was 4, and
the total experimental time was about 6 minutes. Head movement and image distortions
were corrected using a mutual information based registration algorithm [12]. The corrected
DWIs were ﬁtted to the dual compartment model via the modiﬁed MTV framework, then
the isotropic compartment was omitted. FA was calculated for the remaining tensor for
which FA higher than 0.25 was considered as white matter. We compared these results to
single component DT-MRI with no regularization, which was also used for initialization of
the MTV ﬁtting.

4 Results and Discussion

Figure 2: A single slice of a patient with edema.
(A) a non diffusion weighted image
with ROI marked. Showing the tumor in black surrounded by sever edema which appear
bright. (B) Normalized T2 of the ROI, used for f initialization. (C) FA map from DT-MRI
(threshold of FA> 0.25). Large parts of the corpus callosum are obscured. (D) FA map of
D1 from MTV (thresholds f> 0.35, FA> 0.25). A much larger part of the corpus callosum
is revealed

Figure (2) shows the Edema case, where DTI was unable to delineate large parts of the
corpus callosum. Since the corpus callosum is one of the largest ﬁber bundles in the brain

it was highly unlikely that the ﬁbers were disconnected or disappeared. The expected FA
should have been on the same order as on the opposite side of the brain, where the corpus
callosum shows high FA values. Applying the MTV on the slice and mapping the FA value
of the tensor compartment reveals considerably much more pixels of higher FA in the area
of the corpus callosum. In general the FA values of most pixels were increased, which was
predicted, since by removing any size of a sphere (isotropic compartment) we should be left
with a shape which is less spherical, and therefore with increased FA. The beneﬁt of using
the MTV framework over an overall reduce of FA threshold in recognizing neuronal ﬁber
voxels is that the amount of FA increase is not uniform in all tissue types. In areas where
the partial volume was not big due to the edema, the increase was much lower than in areas
contaminated with edema. This keeps the nice contrast re ﬂected by FA values between
neuronal ﬁbers and other tissue types. Reducing the FA threshold on original DT-MRI
results would cause a less clear separation between the ﬁber bundles and other tissue types.
This tool could be used for ﬁber tracking in the vicinity of brain tumors, or with stroke,
where edema contaminates the ﬁbers and prevents ﬁber delineation with the conventional
DT-MRI.

5 Conclusions

We show that by modifying the MTV framework to ﬁt the dual compartment model we
can reduce the contamination of edema, and delineate much larger ﬁber bundle areas. By
using the MTV framework we stabilize the ﬁtting process, and also include some biological
constraints, such as the piece-wise smoothness nature of neuronal ﬁbers in the brain. There
is no doubt that using a much larger number of diffusion measurements should increase the
stabilization of the process, and will increase its accuracy. However, more measurement
require much more scan time, which might not be available in some cases. The variational
framework is a powerful tool for the modeling and regularization of various mappings. It
is applied, with great success, to scalar and vector ﬁelds in image processing and computer
vision. Recently it has been generalized to deal with tensor ﬁelds which are of great interest
to brain research via the analysis of DWIs and DT-MRI. We show that the more realistic
model of multi-compartment voxels conjugated with the variational framework provides
much improved results.

Acknowledgments

We acknowledge the support of the Edersheim - Levi - Gitter Institute for Functional Hu-
man Brain Mapping of Tel-Aviv Sourasky Medical Center and Tel-Aviv University, the
Adams super-center for brain research of Tel-Aviv University, the Israel Academy of Sci-
ences, Israel Ministry of Science, and the Tel-Aviv University research fund.

References

[1] E Stejskal and JE Tanner. Spin diffusion measurements: Spin echoes in the presence
of a time-dependant ﬁeld gradient.
J. Chem. Phys., 42:288–292, 1965.
[2] D. Le-Bihan, J.-F. Mangin, C. Poupon, C.A. Clark, S. Pappata, N. Molko, and
H. Chabriat. Diffusion tensor imaging: concepts and applications. Journal of Mag-
netic Resonance Imaging, 13:534–546, 2001.
[3] S. Mori and P.C. van Zijl. Fiber tracking: principles and strategies - a technical review.
NMR Biomed., 15:468–480, 2002.
[4] P.J. Basser, J. Mattiello, and D. Le-Bihan. MR diffusion tensor spectroscopy and
imaging. Biophysical Journal, 66:259–267, 1994.

[5] P.J. Basser and C. Pierpaoli. Microstructural and physiological features of tissues
elucidated by quantitative-diffusion-tensor MRI. Journal of Magnetic Resonance,
111(3):209–219, June 1996.
[6] C. Pierpaoli, P. Jezzard, P.J. Basser, A. Barnett, and G. Di-Chiro. Diffusion tensor
MR imaging of human brain. Radiology, 201:637–648, 1996.
[7] C. Pierpaoli and D. K. Jones. Removing CSF contamination in brain DT-MRIs by
using a two-compartment tensor model. In Proc. International Society for Magnetic
Resonance in Medicine 12th Scientiﬁc meeting ISMRM04 , page 1215, Kyoto, Japan,
2004.
[8] O. Pasternak, N. Sochen, and Y. Assaf. Variational regularization of multiple diffusion
tensor ﬁelds. In J. Weickert and H. Hagen, editors, Visualization and Processing of
Tensor Fields. Springer, Berlin, 2005.
[9] O. Pasternak, N. Sochen, and Y. Assaf. Separation of white matter fascicles from dif-
fusion MRI using φ-functional regularization. In Proceedings of 12th Annual Meeting
of the ISMRM, page 1227, 2004.
[10] O. Pasternak, N. Sochen, and Y. Assaf. CSF partial volume reduction in hydro-
cephalus using a variational framework. In Proceedings of 13th Annual Meeting of
the ISMRM, page 1100, 2005.
[11] G. Aubert and P. Kornprobst. Mathematical Problems in Image Processing: Partial
Differential Equations and the Calculus of Variations, volume 147 of Applied Math-
ematical Sciences. Springer-Verlag, 2002.
[12] G.K. Rohde, A.S. Barnett, P.J. Basser, S. Marenco, and C. Pierpaoli. Comprehensive
approach for correction of motion and distortion in diffusion-weighted MRI. Mag-
netic Resonance in Medicine, 51:103–114, 2004.

