Phase Synchrony Rate for the Recognition of
Motor Imagery in Brain-Computer Interface

Le Song
Nation ICT Australia
School of Information Technologies
The University of Sydney
NSW 2006, Australia
lesong@it.usyd.edu.au

Evian Gordon
Brain Resource Company
Scientiﬁc Chair, Brain Dynamics Center
Westmead Hospitial
NSW 2006, Australia
eviang@brainresource.com

Elly Gysels
Swiss Center for Electronics and Microtechnology
Neuch ˆatel, CH-2007 Switzerland
elly.gysels@csem.ch

Abstract

Motor imagery attenuates EEG µ and β rhythms over sensorimotor cor-
tices. These amplitude changes are most successfully captured by the
method of Common Spatial Patterns (CSP) and widely used in brain-
computer interfaces (BCI). BCI methods based on amplitude informa-
tion, however, have not incoporated the rich phase dynamics in the EEG
rhythm. This study reports on a BCI method based on phase synchrony
rate (SR). SR, computed from binarized phase locking value, describes
the number of discrete synchronization events within a window. Statisti-
cal nonparametric tests show that SRs contain signiﬁcant differences be-
tween 2 types of motor imageries. Classiﬁers trained on SRs consistently
demonstrate satisfactory results for all 5 subjects. It is further observed
that, for 3 subjects, phase is more discriminative than amplitude in the
ﬁrst 1.5-2.0 s, which suggests that phase has the potential to boost the
information transfer rate in BCIs.

1 Introduction

A brain-computer interface (BCI) is a communication system that relies on the brain rather
than the body for control and feedback. Such an interface offers hope not only for those
severely paralyzed to control wheelchairs but also to enhance normal performance. Current
BCI research is still in its infancy. Most studies focus on ﬁnding useful brain signals and
designing algorithms to interpret them [1, 2].

The most exploited signal in BCI is the scalp-recorded electroencephalogram (EEG). EEG
is a noninvasive measurement of the brain’s electrical activities and has a temporal resolu-
tion of milliseconds. It is well known that motor imagery attenuates EEG µ and β rhythm
over sensorimotor cortices. Depending on the part of the body imagined moving, the am-

plitude of multichannel EEG recordings exhibits distinctive spatial patterns. Classiﬁcation
of these patterns is used to control computer applications. Currently, the most successful
method for BCI is called Common Spatial Patterns (CSP). The CSP method constructs a
few new time series whose variances contain the most discriminative information. For the
problem of classifying 2 types of motor imageries, the CSP method is able to correctly
recognize 90% of the single trials in many studies [3, 4]. Ongoing research on the CSP
method mainly focuses on its extension to the multi-class problem [5] and its integration
with other forms of EEG amplitude information [4].

EEG signals contain both amplitude and phase information. Phase, however, has been
largely ignored in BCI studies. Literature from neuroscience suggests, instead, that phase
can be more discriminative than amplitude [6, 7]. For example, compared to a stimuli in
which no face is present, face perception induces signiﬁcant changes in γ synchrony, but
not in amplitude [6]. Phase synchrony has been proposed as a mechanism for dynamic
integration of distributed neural networks in the brain. Decreased synchrony, on the other
hand, is associated with active unbinding of the neural assemblies and preparation of the
brain for the next mental state (see [7] for a review). Accumulating evidence from both
micro-electrode recordings [8, 9] and EEG measurements [6] provides support to the notion
that phase dynamics subserve all mental processes, including motor planning and imagery.

In the BCI community, only a paucity of results has demonstrated the relevance of phase
information [10–12]. Fewer studies still have ever compared the difference between ampli-
tude and phase information for BCI. To address these de ﬁcits, this paper focuses on three
issues:
• Does binarized phase locking value (PLV) contain relevant information for the
classiﬁcation of motor imageries?
• How does the performance of binarized PLV compare to that of non-binarized
PLV?
• How does the performance of methods based on phase information compare to
that of the CSP method?

In the remainder of the paper, the experimental paradigm will be described ﬁrst. The details
of the method based on binarized PLV are presented in Section 3. Comparison between
PLV, binarized PLV and CSP are then made in Section 4. Finally, conclusions are provided
in Section 5.

2 Recording paradigm

Data set IVa provided by the Berlin BCI group [5] is investigated in this paper (available
from the BCI competition III web site). Five healthy subjects (labeled ‘aa’, ‘al’, ‘av’, ‘aw’
and ‘ay’ respectively) participated in the EEG recordings. Based on the visual cues, they
were required to imagine for 3.5 s either right hand (type 1) or right foot movements (type
2). Each type of motor imagery was carried out 140 times, which results in 280 labeled
trials for each subject. Furthermore, the down-sampled data (at 100 Hz) is used. For
the convenience of explanation, the length of the data is also referred to as time points.
Therefore, the window for the full length of a trial is [1, 350].

3 Feature from phase

3.1 Phase locking value

Two EEG signals xi (t) and xj (t) are said to be synchronized, if their instantaneous phase
difference ψij (t) (complex-valued with unit modulus) stays constant for a period of time

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) ∈ [0, 1],
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
∆ψ . Phase locking value (PLV) is commonly used to quantify the degree of synchrony, i.e.
tX
ψij (t)
t−∆ψ
where 1 represents perfect synchrony. The instantaneous phase difference ψij (t) can be
computed using either wavelet analysis or Hilbert transformation. Studies show that these
two approaches are equivalent for the analysis of EEG signals [13]. In this study, Hilbert
transformation is employed in a similar manner to [10].

P LVij (t) =

1
∆ψ

(1)

3.2 Synchrony rate

Neuroscientists usually threshold the phase locking value and focus on statistically signif-
icant periods of strong synchrony. Only recently, researchers begin to study the transition
between high and low levels of synchrony [6, 14, 15]. Most notably, the researcher in [15]
transformed PLV into discrete values called link rates and showed that link rates could be
a sensitive measure to relevant changes in synchrony. To investigate the usefulness of dis-
cretization for BCIs, we binarize the time series of PLV and deﬁne synchrony rate based
on them.
The threshold chosen to binarize PLV minimizes the quantization error. Suppose that the
Z 1
distribution of PLV is p(x), then the threshold th0 is determined by
(x − g(x − th))2 p(x)dx,
th0 = arg min
(2)
th
0
where g(·) is the hard-limit transfer function which assumes 1 for non-negative numbers
and 0 otherwise. In practice, p(x) is computed at discrete locations and the integration is
replaced by summation. For the data set investigated, th0 s are similar across 5 subjects (’
0.5) when EEG signals are ﬁltered between 4 and 40Hz and ∆ψ is 0.25 s (These parameters
are used in the Result section for all 5 subjects). The thresholded sequences are binary and
denoted by bij (t).
The ones in bij (t) can be viewed as discrete events of strong synchrony, while zeros are
those of weak synchrony. The resemblance of bij (t) to the spike trains of neurons prompts
us to deﬁne synchrony rate (SR)—the number of discrete events of strong synchrony per
tX
second. Formally, given a window ∆b , the synchrony rate rij (t) at time t is:
t−∆b
SR describes the average level of synchrony between a pair of electrodes in a given window.
The size of the window will affect the value of the SR. In the next section, we will detail
the choice of the windows and the selection of features from SRs.

rij (t) =

bij (t).

1
∆b

(3)

3.3 Feature extraction

Before computing synchrony rates, a circular Laplacian [16] is applied to boost the spa-
tial resolution of the raw EEG. This method ﬁrst interpolates the scalp EEG, and then
re-references EEG using interpolated values on a circle around an electrode. Varying the
radius of the circles achieves different spatial ﬁltering effects, and the best radius is tuned
for individual subject.

Spatially ﬁltered EEG is split into 6 sliding windows of length 100, namely [1, 100], [51,
150], [101, 200], [151, 250], [201, 300] and [251, 350]. Each window is further divivded

Figure 1: Overall scheme of window division for (a) the synchrony rate (SR) method and
(b) the phase locking value (PLV) method. ∆ψ for the SR method covers the length of
a micro-window, while that for the PLV method corresponds to the length of a sliding
window. ∆b is equal to 100 − ∆ψ + 1. (Note: time axis is NOT uniformly scaled.)

into 76 micro-windows (with size 25 and overlap by 24). PLVs are then computed and
binarized for each micro-window (according to (1)). Averaging the 76 binarized PLVs
results in the SR (according to (3)). As a whole, 6 SRs will be computed for each electrode
pair in a trial. SRs from all electrode pairs will be passed to statistical tests and further used
as features for classiﬁcation. The overall scheme of this window division is illustrated in
Fig 1(a). In order to compare PLV and SR, PLVs are also computed for the full length of
each sliding window (Fig. 1(b)), which results in 6 PLVs for each electrode pair. These
PLVs will go through the same statistical tests and classiﬁcation stage.

3.4 Statistical test

A key observation is that both PLVs and SRs contain many statistically signiﬁcant dif-
ferences between the 2 types of motor imagery in almost every sliding window. Statistical
nonparametric tests [17] are employed to locate these differences. For each electrode pair, a
null hypothesis— H0 : The difference of the mean SR/PLV for the 2 types of motor imagery
is zero—is formulated for each sliding window. Then the distribution of the difference is
obtained by 1000 randomization. The hypothesis is rejected if the difference of the original
data is larger than 99.5% or smaller than 0.5% of those from randomized data (equivalent
to p < 0.01).
Fig. 2 illustrates the test results with data from subject ‘av’. For simplicity, only those
SRs with signiﬁcant increase are displayed. Although the exact locations of these increases
differ from window to window, some general patterns can be observed. Roughly speak-
ing, window 2, 3 and 4 can be grouped as similar, while window 1, 5 and 6 are different
from each other. Window 1 reﬂects changes in the early stage of a motor imagery, con-
sisting increased couplings mainly within visual cortices and between visual and motor
cortices. Then (window 2, 3 and 4) increased couplings occur between motor cortices of
both hemispheres and between lateral and mesial areas of the motor cortices. During the
last stage, these couplings ﬁrst (window 5) shift to the left hemisphere and then (window 6)
reduce to some sparse distant interactions. Similar patterns can also be discovered from the
PLVs (not illustrated). Although the exact functional interpretation of these patterns awaits
further investigation, they can be treated as potential features for classiﬁcation.

Figure 2: Signiﬁcantly increased synchrony rates in right hand motor imagery. Data are
from subject ‘av’. (A: anterior; L: left; P: posterior; R: right.)

4 Classi ﬁcation strategy
To evaluate the usefulness of synchrony rate for the classiﬁcation of motor imagery, 50 ×2-
fold cross validation is employed to compute the generalization error. This scheme ran-
domizes the order of the trials for 50 times. Each randomization further splits the trials into
two equal halves (of 70 trials), each serving as training data once. There are four steps in
each fold. Averaging the prediction errors from each fold results in the generalization error.
• Compute SRs for each trial (including both training and test data). As illustrated in
Fig. 1(a), this results in a 6 dimensional (one for each window) feature vector for each
electrode pair (6903= 118×(118−1)
pairs in total). Alternatively, it can be viewed as a 6903
2
dimensional feature vector for each window.
|µ+−µ− |
• Filter features using the Fisher ratio. The Fisher ratio (a variant,
σ++σ− , is used in the
actual computation) measures the discriminability of individual feature for classiﬁcation
task. It is computed using training data only, and then compared to a threshold (0.3), below
which a feature is discarded. The indices of the selected features are further used to ﬁlter
the test data. The selected features are not necessarily all those located by the statistical
tests. Generally, they are only a subset of the most signiﬁcant SRs.
• Train a linear SVM for each window and use meta-training scheme to combine them. The
evolving nature of the SRs (illustrated in Fig. 2) suggests that information in the 6 windows
may be complementary to each other. Similar to [4], a second level of linear SVM is trained
on the output of the SVMs for individual windows. This meta-training scheme allows us to
exploit the inter-window relations. (Note that this step is carried out strictly on the training
data.)
• Predict the label of the test data. Test data are fed into the two-level SVM, and the
prediction error is measured as the proportion of the misclassiﬁed trials.

The above four steps are also used to compute the generalization errors for the PLV method.
The only modiﬁcation is in step one, where PLVs are computed instead of SRs (Fig. 1(b)).
In the next section, we will present the generalization errors for both SR and PLV method,
and compare them to those of the CSP method.

5 Result and comparison

5.1 Generalization error

Table 1 shows the generalization errors in percentage (with standard deviations) for both
synchrony rate and PLV method. For comparison, we also computed the generalization
errors of the CSP method [3] using linear SVM and 50×2-fold cross validation. The pa-
rameters of the CSP method (including ﬁltering frequency, the number of channels used
and the number of spatial patterns selected) are individually tuned for each subject accord-
ing the competition winning entry of data set IVa [18]. Note that all errors in Table 1 are
computed using the full length (3.5 s) of a trial.

Generally, the errors of the SR method is higher than those of the PLV method. This is
because SR is an approximation of PLV by deﬁnition. Remember that during the compu-
tation of SRs, the PLVs in the micro-windows are ﬁrst binarized with a threshold th0 . This
threshold is so chosen that the approximation is as close to its original as possible. It works
especially well for two of the subjects (‘al’ and ‘ay’), with the difference between the two
methods less than 1%. Although SR method produces higher errors, it may have some ad-
vantages in practice. Especially for hardware implemented BCI systems, smaller window
for PLV computation means smaller buffer and binarized PLV makes further processing
easier and faster.

The errors of the CSP method is lowest for most of the subjects. For subject ‘aa’ and
‘aw’, it is better than the other two methods by 10-20%, but the gaps are narrowed for
subject ‘al’ and ‘av’ (less than 2.5%). Most notably, for subject ‘ay’, the SR method even
outperforms the CSP method by about 5%. Remember that the CSP method is implemented
using individually optimized parameters, while those for the SR and PLV method are the
same across the 5 subjects. Fine tuning the parameters has the potential to further improve
the performance of the latter two methods. The errors computed above, however, reveals
only partial difference between the three methods. In the next subsection, a more thorough
investigation will be carried out using information transfer rates.

5.2 Information transfer rate

Information transfer rate (ITR) [1] is the amount of information (measured in bits) gener-
ated by a BCI system within a second. It takes both the error and the length of a trial into
account. If two BCI systems produce the same error, the one with a short trial will have
higher information transfer rate. To investigate the performance of the three methods in this
context, we shortened the trials into 5 different lengths, namely 1.0 s, 1.5 s, 2.0 s, 2.5 s and
3.0 s. The generalization errors are computed for these shortened trials and then converted
into information transfer rates, as showed in Fig. 3.

Interesting results emerge from the curves in Fig. 3. Most subjects (except subject ‘aw’)
achieve the highest information transfer rates within the ﬁrst 1.5-2.0 s. Although longer
trials usually decrease the errors, they do not necessarily result in increased information
transfer rates. Furthermore, for subject ‘al’, ‘av’ and ‘ay’, the highest information transfer

Table 1: Generalization errors (%) of the synchrony rate (SR), PLV and CSP methods
Subject
ay
aw
av
aa
al
4.05±1.28
29.34±3.97
32.67±3.41
22.96±4.39
5.93±1.75
SR
5.41±1.53
18.65±3.48
29.91±3.23
3.59±1.28
23.05±3.39
PLV
12.58±2.56
2.65±1.35
30.30±3.02
3.16±1.32
11.43±2.34
CSP

Figure 3: Information transfer rates (ITR) for synchrony rate (SR), PLV and CSP method.
Horizontal axis is time T (in seconds). Vertical axis on the left measures information trans-
fer rate (in bit/second) and that on the right shows the generalization error (GE) in deci-
mals. The three lines of Greek characters under each subplot code the results of statistical
comparisons (Student’s t-test, signiﬁcance level 0.01) of different methods. Line 1 is the
comparison between SR and CSP methods; Line 2 is between SR and PLV method; and
Line 3 between PLV and CSP method.

rates are achieved by methods based on phase. Especially for subject ‘ay’, phase generates
about 0.2 bits more information per second. The qualitative similarity between SR and
PLV method suggests that phase can be more discriminative than amplitude within the
ﬁrst 1.5-2.0 s. Common to the three methods, however, the near zero information transfer
rates within the ﬁrst second virtually pose a limit for BCIs. In the case where real-time
application is of high priority, such as navigating wheelchairs, this problem is even more
pronounced. Incorporating phase information and continuing the search for new features
have the potential to overcome this limit.

6 Conclusion

EEG phase contains complex dynamics. Changes of phase synchrony provide complemen-
tary information to EEG amplitude. Our results show that within the ﬁrst 1.5-2.0 s of a
motor imagery, phase can be more useful for classiﬁcation and can be exploited by our
synchrony rate method. Although methods based on phase have achieved good results in

some subjects, the subject-wise difference and the exact functional interpretation of the
selected features need further investigation. Solving these problems have the potential to
boost information transfer rates in BCIs.

Acknowledgments

The author would like to thank Ms. Yingxin Wu and Dr. Julien Epps from NICTA, and Dr.
Michael Breakspear from Brain Dynamics Center for discussion.

References

[1] J.R. Wolpaw et al., “Brain-computer interface technology: a review of the ﬁrst international
meeting,”
IEEE Trans. Rehab. Eng., vol. 8, pp. 164-173, 2000.
[2] T.M. Vaughan et al., “Brain-computer interface technonolgy: a review of the second international
meeting,”
IEEE Trans. Rehab. Eng., vol. 11, pp. 94-109, 2003.
[3] H. Ramoser, J. M ¨uller-Gerking, and G. Pfurtscheller, “Optimal spatial ﬁltering of single trial
EEG during imagined hand movement,”
IEEE Trans. Rehab. Eng., vol. 8, pp. 441-446, 2000.
[4] G. Dornhege, B. Blankertz, G. Curio, and K.R. M ¨uller, “Combining features for BCI,” Advances
in Neural Inf. Proc. Systems (NIPS 02), vol. 15, pp. 1115-1122, 2003.
[5] G. Dornhege, B. Blankertz, G. Curio, and K.R. M ¨uller, “Boosting bit rates in non-invasive
EEG single-trial classiﬁcations by feature combination and multi-class paradigms,”
IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 51, pp. 993-1002, 2004.
[6] E. Rodriguez et al., “Perception’s shadow: long distance synchronization of human brain activ-
ity,” Nature, vol. 397, pp. 430-433, 1999.
[7] F. Varela, J.P. Lachaux, E. Rodriguez, and J. Martinerie, “The brainweb: phase synchronization
and large-scale integration,” Nature Reviews Neuroscience, vol. 2, pp. 229-239, 2001.
[8] W. Singer, and C.M. Gray, “Visual feature integration and the temporal correlation hypothesis,”
Annu. Rev. Neurosci, vol. 18, pp. 555-586, 1995.
[9] P.R. Roelfsema, A.K. Engel, P. K ¨onig, and W. Singer, “Visuomotor integration is associated with
zero time-lag synchronization among cortical areas,” Nature, vol. 385, pp. 157-161, 1997.
[10] E. Gysels, and P. Celka, “Phase synchronization for the recognition of mental tasks in brain-
computer interface,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehab. Eng., vol. 12, pp. 406-415, 2004.
[11] C. Brunner, B. Graimann, J.E. Huggins, S.P Levine and G. Pfurtscheller, “Phase relationships
between different subdural electrode recordings in man,” Neurosci. Lett., vol. 275, pp.69-74,
2005.
[12] L. Song, “Desynchronization network analysis for the recognition of imagined movement in
BCIs,”, Proc. of 27th IEEE EMBS conference, Shanghai, China, September 2005.
[13] M. Le Van Quyen et al., “Comparison of Hilbert transform and wavelet methods for the analysis
of neuronal synchrony,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 111, pp. 83-98, 2001.
[14] M. Breakspear, L. Williams, and C.J. Stam, “A novel method for the topographic analysis of
neural activity reveals formation and dissolution of ‘dynmaic cell assemblies’,” J. Comput. Neu-
rosci., vol. 16, pp. 49-68, 2004.
[15] M.J.A.M van Putten, “Proposed link rates in the human brain,”
127, pp. 1-10, 2003.
[16] L. Song, and J. Epps, “Improving separability of EEG signals during motor imagery with an
efﬁcient circular Laplacian,” in preparation.
[17] T.E. Nichols, and A.P. Holmes, “Nonparametric permutation tests for functional neuroimaging:
a primer with examples,” Human Brain Mapping, vol. 15, pp. 1-25, 2001.
[18] Y.J. Wang, X.R. Gao, Z.G. Zhang, B. Hong, and S.K. Gao, “BCI competition III—data set IVa:
classifying single-trial EEG during motor imagery with a small training set,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Syst. Rehab. Eng., submitted.

J. of Neurosci. Methods, vol.

