CM O L   C r o s s N e t s :   P o s s i b l e   N e u r om o r p h i c
N a n o e l e c t r o n i c   C i r c u i t s    

 
         Jung Hoon Lee                                            X iaolong Ma                         Konstantin K. Likharev 
Stony Brook  University 
Stony Brook ,  NY  11794-3800  
 klikharev@notes.cc.sunysb.edu    

 
 

Abstract 
Hybrid   “CMOL”  integrated   circuits,  comb ining   CMOS  subsystem 
with   nanowire  crossbars   and  simple  two-terminal  nanodevices , 
promise   to   extend   the   exponential  Moore-Law   development  of 
microelectronics   into   the   sub-10-nm  range .  We  are  developing 
neuromorphic   network   (“CrossNet”)   architectures   for   this  future  
technology,   in which  neural cell bodies  are   imp lemented   in  CMOS ,  
nanowires   are   used   as   axons   and   dendrites ,   while  nanodevices  
(bistable  latching   switches)  are  used  as  elementary  synapses.  We 
have   shown   how   CrossNets   may  be   trained   to   perform  pattern  
recovery  and  classification   despite  the   limitations   imposed   by  the  
CMOL  hardware.    Preliminary  estima tes  have  shown   that  CMOL  
CrossNets may be extreme ly dense (~10 7 cells per cm2)  and  operate 
approxima tely  a  million  times  faster  than  biological neural networks , 
at  manageable   power   consumption .   In  Conclusion ,   we   discuss   in 
brief  possible  short-term and  long-term applications  of  the  emerging  
technology.  

1   I n t r o d u c t i o n :   C M O L   C i r c u i t s  

Recent  results  [1,  2]  indicate  that  the   current  VLSI  paradigm  based  on  CMOS 
technology  can   be   hardly  extended   beyond   the   10-nm  frontier:  in   this  range   the  
sensitivity  of   parame ters  (mos t  importantly,  the  gate   voltage  threshold)   of   silicon  
field-effect  transistors  to  inevitable  fabrication   spreads  grows  exponentially.  This  
sensitivity  will  probably  send   the  fabrication   facilities  costs  skyrocketing ,   and   may  
lead to the end of Moore’s Law some time during the next decade.   
There   is  a   growing   consensus   that  the   impending   Moore’s   Law  crisis  may   be 
preempted   by  a   radical  paradigm  shift  from  the   purely  CMOS   technology  to  hybrid  
CMOS/nanodevice circuits, e.g., those of “CMOL” variety (Fig. 1). Such circuits (see, 
e.g., Ref. 3 for their recent review) would combine a leve l of advanced  CMOS devices 
fabricated   by  the   lithographic   patterning ,   and   two-layer   nanowire   crossbar   formed ,  
e .g . ,   by  nanoimprint,   with   nanowires   connected   by  simple,   similar ,   two-terminal  
nanodevices at each crosspoint. For  such devices,  molecular   single-electron  latching 
switches  [4]  are  presently  the  leading  candidates,  in   particular  because  they  may  be 
fabricated  using   the  self-assembled  monolayer   (SAM)   technique which  already gave  
reproducible results for simpler molecular devices [5].  
 

 

nanodev ices  

(a)  

 

(b)  

 
nanowi r ing  
and  
nanodev ices  
in ter face  p ins  
uppe r  wi r ing  
leve l  o f  CMOS  
s tack  

Fn an o  

βFCMOS 

 
 
 
 
 
α  
 
Fig .   1 .   CMOL   circuit:   (a)  schema tic   s ide   view,   and   (b)   top-view   zoom-in   on   several 
ad jacen t   in terface  p ins.  (For  c lar i ty ,  on ly   two  ad jacen t  nanodev ices are  shown .)   
 
In  order  to  overcome  the  CMOS/nanodevice  interface  problems  pertinent  to  earlier 
proposals  of  hybrid  circuits  [6],  in  CMOL  the  interface  is  provided  by  pins  that  are 
distributed all over the circuit area, on the top  of the CMOS stack . This allows to  use 
advanced  techniques   of   nanowire   patterning   (like   nanoimprint)   which   do   not  have 
nanoscale accuracy of layer alignment [3].  The vital feature of this interface is the tilt, 
by  angle   α   =  arcsin(Fnano/βFCMOS),  of   the  nanowire  crossbar  relative  to   the  square 
arrays of interface pins (Fig. 1b). Here Fnano is the nanowiring  half-pitch,  FCMOS is the 
half-pitch  of   the  CMOS  subsystem,  and  β  is a  dimensionless  factor   larger  than  1   that  
depends on  the CMOS cell complexity. Figure 1b  shows that this tilt a llows the CMOS 
subsystem to address each nanodevice even if Fnano << βFCMOS.    
By  now ,   it  has   been   shown   that CMOL   circuits  can  comb ine  high  performance  with 
high   defect  tolerance   (which   is  necessary  for   any  circuit  using   nanodevices)   for 
several  digital   applications.  In   particular,  CMOL  circuits  with   defect  rates  below  a  
few  percent  would  enable  terabit-scale  memories  [7],   while  the  performance  of 
FPGA-like   CMOL   circuits   may  be   several  hundred   times   above   that  of   overcome  
purely  CMOL  FPGA  (implemented  with  the  same  FCMOS),  at  acceptable  power 
dissipation  and  defect tolerance  above  20% [8].    
In  addition ,  the  very structure  of  CMOL  circuits makes  them uniquely suitable  for  the  
implementation   of   more   complex ,   mixed-signal  information   processing   systems ,  
including  ultradense  and  ultrafast neuromorphic networks .  The  objective  of  this paper  
is  to  describe   in  brief   the  current  status  of our work on   the  development of   so-called  
Distributed   Crossbar   Networks  (“CrossNets”)   that  could   provide   high   performance 
despite  the  limitations  imposed   by  CMOL  hardware. A more  detailed   description  of 
our earlier  results may be  found  in  Ref .  9 . 

2   S y n a p s e s  
The central device of CrossNet is a two-terminal latching switch [3, 4] (Fig. 2a) which is a 
combination of two single-electron devices, a transistor and a trap [3]. The device may be 
naturally  implemented  as  a  single  organic  molecule  (Fig.  2b).  Qualitatively,  the  device 
operates  as  follows:  if  voltage  V  =  Vj  –  Vk  applied  between  the  external  electrodes  (in 
CMOL, nanowires) is low, the trap island has no net electric charge, and the single-electron 
transistor  is  closed.  If voltage V  approaches  certain  threshold value V+ >  0,  an  additional 
electron  is  inserted  into  the  trap  island,  and  its  field  lifts  the  Coulomb  blockade  of  the 
single-electron  transistor,  thus  connecting  the  nanowires.  The  switch  state  may  be  reset 
(e.g., wires disconnected) by applying a lower voltage V < V- < V+. 
Due to the random character of single-electron tunneling [2], the quantitative description of 
the switch is by necessity probabilistic: actually, V determines only the rates Γ↑↓  of device 

switching  between  its ON  and OFF  states.  The  rates,  in  turn,  determine  the  dynamics  of 
probability p to have the transistor opened (i.e. wires connected):   
(1) 
dp/dt  = Γ↑(1 - p) - Γ↓p. 
The theory of single-electron tunneling [2] shows that, in a good approximation, the rates 
may be presented as 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Γ↑↓ = Γ0 exp{±e(V - S)/kBT} , 

 s ing le-e lec tron   trap  

(2) 

(a) 

 V j 

  tunne l    
junc t ion  

 Vk 

s ing le-e lec t ron   t rans is to r  

R

O

O

N

O

O

N

O

d i im ide  
accep to r  g roups  
O

N

O

N

(b) 

O

O

R

R

R

OPE  w ires

R

R

N

C

N

C

R = hexyl
c l ipp ing  
group  

C

N

R

O

R

R

R

R

R

O

O

 
Fig .   2 .   (a)   Schematics   and   (b)   possible   molecu lar   implementation   of   the   two-termina l  
single-electron   latching  switch  
 
where Γ0  and S  are  constants depending on physical parameters of  the  latching  switches. 
Note  that  despite  the  random  character  of  switching,  the  strong  nonlinearity  of  Eq.  (2) 
allows to limit the degree of the device “fuzziness”.  

3   C r o s s N e t s  

Figure   3a   shows   the   generic   structure   of   a   CrossNet.   CMOS-implemented   soma tic  
cells (within  the Fire Rate model, just nonlinear differential amp lif iers, see Fig .  3b ,c)  
apply  their  output voltages   to  “axonic”  nanowires .  If   the   la tching  switch ,  working  as  
an  elementary  synapse,  on  the   crosspoint  of   an   axonic  wire   with   the  perpendicular  
“dendritic”  wire  is  open ,  some  current  flows  into  the  latter  wire,  charging  it.  Since  
such  currents  are  injected   into  each  dendritic  wire  through  several  (many)  open 
synapses ,  their  addition  provides  a  natural passive  analog  summation  of  signals from  
the   corresponding   somas ,   typical  for   all  neural  networks .   Examining   Fig .  3a ,  please  
note  the  open-circuit  terminations  of  axonic  and   dendritic  lines  at  the  borders  of  the 
soma tic   cells;   due   to   these   terminations   the   somas   do   not  communicate   directly  (but 
only via  synapses) .      
The network shown on Fig. 3 is evidently feedforward; recurrent networks are achieved in 
the evident way by doubling the number of synapses and nanowires per somatic cell (Fig. 
3c). Moreover,  using  dual-rail  (bipolar)  representation  of  the  signal,  and  hence  doubling 
the  number  of  nanowires  and  elementary  synapses  once  again,  one  gets  a CrossNet with 

 

 

jk

 
sinh

04
= − Γ

d w
dt

somas coupled by compact 4-switch groups [9]. Using Eqs. (1) and (2), it is straightforward 
to show  that  that  the average synaptic weight wjk of  the group obeys  the “quasi-Hebbian” 
rule: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

+ - 
soma 
j 

(
V
γ

 
j

(
S
γ

)
 
sinh

sinh

(
V
 
γ
k

)

.

(a) 

 

(3) 

jk+ 

)

 

(b) 

(c) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

jk - 

RL 
+
-
-
RL 

RL 
+ 
- 
- 
RL 

+ 
-
soma 
k 

 
 
Fig .  3 .   (a)  Generic   structure  of   the   simplest ,   (feedforward ,  non-Hebbian)  CrossNet .  Red   lines  
show   “axon ic” ,   and   b lue  l ines  “dendr i t ic”   nanow ires.   Gray   squares  are   in terfaces  be tween  
nanowires   and   CMOS-based   somas   (b ,   c) .   Signs  show   the   dendrite   input   polarities .   Green 
c irc les   deno te   molecu lar   la tch ing   switches   forming   elementa ry   synapses .   Bold   red   and   blue 
points   are   open-circuit   terminations   of   the   nanowires ,   that   do   not   allow   somas   to   interact   in  
bypass  of  synapses  
 
In   the  simplest  cases  (e.g .,  quasi-Hopfield   networks  with   finite  connectivity),  the 
tri-level  synaptic  weights  of  the  generic  CrossNets  are  quite  satisfactory,  leading  to  
just  a  very  modest  (~30%)  network  capacity  loss.  However,  some  applications   (in 
particular ,  pattern  classification)  may require  a  larger  number  of  weight quantization  
levels L  (e .g . , L  ≈  30  for  a 1%  fidelity  [9]). This may  be  achieved   by  using  compact 
square  arrays (e .g . ,  4×4)  of  latching  switches  (Fig .  4) .  
Various  species   of  CrossNets   [9]  differ  also  by  the  way  the  somatic  cells  are 
distributed   around   the  synaptic  field .   Figure   5   shows   feedforward   versions   of   two 
CrossNet  types  most  explored  so  far:  the  so-called   FlossBar   and   InBar .   The   former  
network   is  more  natural  for  the  imp lementation   of   multilayered   perceptrons  (MLP), 
while  the  latter  system  is  preferable  for  recurrent  network   implementations  and  also  
allows a simpler CMOS design  of  soma tic cells.   
The   most  important  advantage   of   CrossNets   over   the  hardware   neural  networks  
suggested  earlier is that these networks allow to  achieve enormous density comb ined  
with  large cell  connectivity M >> 1 in quasi-2D electronic circuits. 

4   C r o s s N e t   t r a i n i n g  

CrossNet training faces several hardware-imposed challenges: 

 

Vw–  A /2  

(b) 

i ' =    1            2            …                n    

i ' =    1              2          …                  n    

i  =  1  
 
         2  
 
       …  
 
         n    

i  =  1  
 
         2  
 
       …  
 
         n    

          (i) The  synaptic weight  contribution provided by  the  elementary  latching  switch  is 
binary, so that for most applications the multi-switch synapses (Fig. 4) are necessary. 
          (ii) The only way to adjust any particular synaptic weight is to turn ON or OFF the 
corresponding latching switch(es). This is only possible to do by applying certain voltage V 
= Vj – Vk between the two corresponding nanowires. At this procedure, other nanodevices 
attached to the same wires should not be disturbed. 
                  (iii) As stated above, synapse state switching is a statistical progress, so that the 
degree  of  its “fuzziness”  should  be  carefully controlled .    
 
(a) 
   V j 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   V j 
 
 
 
±(V t  +A /2 )  
 
Fig .  4 .  Composite  synapse  for  providing  L =  2n2+1  d iscre te  leve ls  of  the  we igh t  in  (a)  opera t ion  
and   (b)   weight   adjustment   modes .   The   dark-gray   rectang les  are   res is t ive   me ta l l ic   s tr ips   a t  
soma /nanow ire   in terfaces 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.  5.  Two  main  CrossNet  species:  (a)  FlossBar  and  (b)  InBar,  in  the  generic  (feedforward, 
non-Hebbian,  ternary-weight)  case  for  the  connectivity  parameter  M  =  9.  Only  the  nanowires  and 
nanodevices coupling one cell (indicated with red dashed lines) to M post-synaptic cells (blue dashed 
lines) are shown; actually all the cells are similarly coupled 

RL  

RS  

±(V t  –A /2)  

RS    

Vw+  A /2  

(a)

(b) 

We  have  shown   that  these  challenges  may  be  met  using   (at  leas t)  the  following 
training  methods  [9]: 

 

(i)   Synaptic  weight  import.  This  procedure  is  started   with   training   of  a 
 
homomorphic   “precursor”   artificial neural  network  with  continuous   synaptic weighs  
w jk,   implemented   in   software ,   using  one   of  established   methods   (e .g . ,  error 
backpropagation).  Then  the synaptic weights  w jk are transferred to the CrossNet, with  
some  “clipping”   (rounding)  due   to   the  binary nature  of  elementary synaptic weights .  
To  accomplish   the  transfer ,  pairs  of  somatic  ce lls  are  sequentially  selec ted  via 
CMOS-level  wiring .   Using   the  flexibility  of   CMOS  circuitry,  these  cells   are 
reconfigured   to   apply  external  voltages   ±VW  to   the  axonic  and   dendritic   nanowires 
leading   to   a   particular   synapse ,  while  all  other   nanowires   are   grounded .  The  voltage 
level VW is selected  so  that it does  not switch  the  synapses  attached  to  only one  of  the  
selected  nanowires, while voltage 2VW applied  to  the  synapse  at the  crosspoint of the 
selected wires is sufficient for its reliable switching .  (In the  composite  synapses  with  
quasi-continuous weights  (Fig .  4) ,  only a part of the  corresponding switches  is turned  
ON  or  OFF .) 
(ii)  Error  backpropagation.  The  synaptic  weight 
 
import  procedure 
is 
straightforward when wjk may be  simply calculated, e.g.,  for  the Hopfield-type networks. 
However, for very  large CrossNets used, e.g., as pattern classifiers  the precursor network 
training may take an impracticably long time. In this case the direct training of a CrossNet 
may become necessary. We have developed two methods of such  training, both based on 
“Hebbian”  synapses  consisting  of  4  elementary  synapses  (latching  switches)  whose 
average  weight  dynamics  obeys  Eq.  (3).  This  quasi-Hebbian  rule  may  be  used  to 
implement the backpropagation algorithm either using a periodic time-multiplexing [9] or 
in a continuous fashion, using the simultaneous propagation of signals and errors along the 
same dual-rail channels.  
As a result,  presently we may state that CrossNets may be taught to perform virtually  
all major functions demonstrated  earlier with  the usual neural networks, including  the  
corrupted   pattern   restoration   in   the   recurrent  quasi-Hopfield   mode   and   pattern 
classification in the feedforward  MLP  mode  [11].  

5   C r o s s N e t   p e r f o r m a n c e   e s t i m a t e s  

The  significance  of  this  result  may  be  only  appreciated  in  the  context  of  unparalleled 
physical  parameters  of  CMOL  CrossNets.  The  only  fundamental  limitation  on  the 
half-pitch Fnano (Fig. 1) comes from quantum-mechanical tunneling between nanowires. If 
the  wires  are  separated  by  vacuum,  the  corresponding  specific  leakage  conductance 
becomes  uncomfortably  large  (~10-12  Ω-1m-1)  only  at  Fnano  =  1.5  nm;  however,  since 
realistic insulation materials (SiO2, etc.) provide somewhat lower tunnel barriers, let us use 
a more conservative value Fnano= 3 nm. Note that this value corresponds to 1012 elementary 
synapses per cm2, so that for 4M = 104 and n = 4 the areal density of neural cells is close to 
2×107 cm-2. Both numbers are higher than those for the human cerebral cortex, despite the 
fact that the quasi-2D CMOL circuits have to compete with quasi-3D cerebral cortex. 
With  the  typical  specific  capacitance  of  3×10-10  F/m  =  0.3  aF/nm,  this  gives  nanowire 
capacitance  C0  ≈  1  aF  per  working  elementary  synapse,  because  the  corresponding 
segment has length 4Fnano. The CrossNet operation speed is determined mostly by the time 
constant  τ0  of  dendrite  nanowire  capacitance  recharging  through  resistances  of  open 
nanodevices. Since both the relevant conductance and capacitance increase similarly with 
M and n, τ0 ≈ R0C0.  
The possibilities of reduction of R0, and hence τ0, are limited mostly by acceptable power 
2/(2Fnano)2R0. For  room-temperature operation, 
dissipation per unit  area,  that  is  close  to Vs
the  voltage  scale  V0  ≈  Vt  should  be  of  the  order  of  at  least  30  kBT/e  ≈  1  V  to  avoid 
thermally-induced  errors  [9].  With  our  number  for  Fnano,  and  a  relatively  high  but 
acceptable power consumption of 100 W/cm2, we get R0 ≈ 1010Ω (which is a very realistic 

 

value  for  single-molecule  single-electron  devices  like  one  shown  in  Fig.  3).  With  this 
number, τ0 is as small as ~10 ns. This means that the CrossNet speed may be approximately 
six orders of magnitude (!) higher than that of the biological neural networks. Even scaling 
R0  up  by  a  factor  of  100  to  bring  power  consumption  to  a  more  comfortable  level  of  1 
W/cm2, would still leave us at least a four-orders-of-magnitude speed advantage.  

6   D i s c u s s i o n :   P o s s i b l e   a p p l i c a t i o n s  

These  estima tes make  us  believe  that  that   CMOL  CrossNet  chips may  revolutionize  
the   neuromorphic   network   applications .   Let  us   start  with   the   examp le   of   relatively  
small   (1-cm2-scale)  chips  used  for  recognition  of  a  face  in  a  crowd  [11].    The  mos t  
difficult  feature  of  such   recognition  is  the  search  for  face  location,  i.e.  optima l  
placement  of  a  face  on  the  image  relative  to  the  panel  providing  input  for  the 
processing   network.   The   enormous   density   and   speed  of   CMOL   hardware   gives   a  
possibility   to   time-and-space  multiplex   th is  task   (Fig .  6) .  In   this  approach ,  the  full 
image  (say,  formed  by  CMOS  photodetectors   on  the   same  chip)   is  divided  into  P 
rectangular  panels of  h×w pixels,  corresponding  to  the  expected size and approximate  
shape  of  a  single  face.  A  CMOS-implemented  communication  channel  passes  input 
data from each  panel  to   the  corresponding CMOL neural network ,  providing   its shift 
in   time,  say using   the TV scanning pattern  (red  line   in Fig .  6) . The standard  methods  
of image class ification require the network to  have just a few hidden  layers, so  that the  
time  interval  Δt  necessary  for  each  mapping  position  may  be  so  short  that  the  tota l 
pattern  recognition  time T = hwΔt may be acceptable even for online face recognition.  
 
w 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6. Scan mapping of the input image on CMOL CrossNet inputs. Red lines show the possible time 
sequence of image pixels sent to a certain input of the network processing image from the upper-left 
panel of the pattern 

   ne two rk    
    inpu t   

h

image  

Indeed , let us consider a 4-Megapixel image partitioned  into 4K 32×32-pixel panels (h 
= w = 32). This panel will require an MLP net with  several (say, four) layers with  1K 
cells   each  in  order  to  compare  the  panel  image  with  ~103  stored  faces.  W ith  the 
feasible  4-nm  nanowire   half-pitch ,   and   65-level  synapses  (sufficient  for  better  than  
99% fidelity [9]), each interlayer crossbar would require chip area about (4K×64  nm)2  
= 64×64  μm2,  fitting  4×4K of  them on  a  ~0.6  cm2 chip . (The CMOS somatic-layer and 
communica tion-system  overheads  are  negligible.)  With   the  acceptable  power 
consumption  of  the  order  of 10  W /cm2,  the  input-to-output signal propagation  in  such 
a network  will take only about 50  ns, so that Δt may be  of  the  order  of  100  ns  and  the  
total  time T = hwΔt of  processing  one  frame of   the  order  of  100  microseconds ,  much  
shorter  than   the  typical  TV  frame  time  of   ~10   milliseconds.  The  remain ing  

 

two-orders-of-magnitude  time  gap  may be  used , for  examp le ,  for  double-checking the  
results via stopping  the scan  mapping  (Fig. 6)  at the most  promis ing  position .  (For  this, 
a  simple feedback  from the  recognition  output to  the  mapping  communication  system  
is necessary.) 
It  is  instructive  to  compare  the  estimated  CMOL  chip  speed  with  that  of  the 
implementation of a similar parallel network ensemble on a CMOS signal processor (say, 
also combined on  the same chip with an array of CMOS photodetectors). Even assuming 
an  extremely  high  performance  of  30  billion  additions/multiplications  per  second,  we 
would  need  ~4×4K×1K×(4K)2/(30×109)  ≈  104  seconds  ~  3  hours  per  frame,    evidently 
incompatible with the online image stream processing. 
Let  us  finish  with  a  brief  (and  much  more  speculative)  discussion  of  possible  long-term 
prospects of CMOL CrossNets. Eventually, large-scale (~30×30 cm2) CMOL circuits may 
become available. According to the estimates given in the previous section, the integration 
scale of such a system (in terms of both neural cells and synapses) will be comparable with 
that  of  the  human  cerebral  cortex.  Equipped  with  a  set  of  broadband  sensor/actuator 
interfaces, such (necessarily, hierarchical) system may be capable, after a period of initial 
supervised training, of further self-training in the process of interaction with environment, 
with  the  speed  several  orders  of  magnitude  higher  than  that  of  its  biological  prototypes. 
Needless to say, the successful development of such self-developing systems would have a 
major impact not only on all information technologies, but also on the society as a whole. 

A c k n o w l e d g m e n t s  
This  work  has  been   supported   in   part  by  the  AFOSR, MARCO  (via  FENA  Center), 
and   NSF.   Valuable  contributions   made   by  Simon   Fölling ,   Özgür   Türel  and   Ibrahim  
Muckra ,  as  well as  useful discussions  with  P. Adams, J.  Barhen , D.  Hammerstrom,  V. 
Protopopescu , T. Sejnowski, and  D .  Strukov are gratefully acknowledged.   

R e f e r e n c e s    
 
[1]  Frank,  D.  J.  et  al.  (2001)  Device  scaling  limits  of  Si  MOSFETs  and  their  application 
dependencies. Proc. IEEE  89(3): 259-288.  
[2]  Likharev,  K.  K.  (2003)  Electronics  below  10  nm,  in  J.  Greer  et  al.  (eds.),  Nano  and  Giga 
Challenges in Microelectronics, pp. 27-68. Amsterdam: Elsevier.  
[3]  Likharev, K. K.  and  Strukov, D. B.  (2005)  CMOL:  Devices,  circuits,  and  architectures,  in G. 
Cuniberti et al. (eds.), Introducing Molecular Electronics, Ch. 16. Springer, Berlin. 
[4]  Fölling, S., Türel, Ö. & Likharev, K. K. (2001) Single-electron  latching switches as nanoscale 
synapses, in Proc. of the 2001 Int. Joint Conf. on Neural Networks, pp. 216-221. Mount Royal, 
NJ: Int. Neural Network Society. 
[5]  Wang,  W.  et  al.  (2003)  Mechanism  of  electron  conduction  in  self-assembled  alkanethiol 
monolayer devices. Phys. Rev. B 68(3): 035416 1-8. 
[6]  Stan  M.  et  al.  (2003)  Molecular  electronics:  From  devices  and  interconnect  to  circuits  and 
architecture, Proc. IEEE  91(11): 1940-1957. 
[7]  Strukov, D. B.  & Likharev, K. K. (2005) Prospects for terabit-scale nanoelectronic memories. 
Nanotechnology 16(1): 137-148. 
[8]  Strukov,  D.  B.  &  Likharev,  K.  K.  (2005)  CMOL  FPGA:  A  reconfigurable  architecture  for 
hybrid digital circuits with two-terminal nanodevices.  Nanotechnology 16(6): 888-900. 
[9]  Türel, Ö. et al. (2004) Neuromorphic architectures for nanoelectronic circuits”, Int. J. of Circuit 
Theory and Appl. 32(5): 277-302. 
[10]  See, e.g., Hertz J. et al. (1991) Introduction to the Theory of Neural Computation. Cambridge, 
MA: Perseus. 
[11]  Lee, J. H. & Likharev, K. K. (2005) CrossNets as pattern classifiers. Lecture Notes in Computer 
Sciences 3575: 434-441. 

