Visual Encoding with Jittering Eyes

Michele Rucci(cid:3)
Department of Cognitive and Neural Systems
Boston University
Boston, MA 02215
rucci@cns.bu.edu

Abstract

Under natural viewing conditions, small movements of the eye and body
prevent the maintenance of a steady direction of gaze. It is known that
stimuli tend to fade when they are stabilized on the retina for several sec-
onds. However, it is unclear whether the physiological self-motion of the
retinal image serves a visual purpose during the brief periods of natural
visual ﬁxation. This study examines the impact of ﬁxational
instability
on the statistics of visual input to the retina and on the structure of neural
activity in the early visual system. Fixational instability introduces ﬂuc-
tuations in the retinal input signals that, in the presence of natural images,
lack spatial correlations. These input ﬂuctuations strongly in ﬂuence neu-
ral activity in a model of the LGN. They decorrelate cell responses, even
if the contrast sensitivity functions of simulated cells are not perfectly
tuned to counter-balance the power-law spectrum of natural images. A
decorrelation of neural activity has been proposed to be beneﬁcial
for
discarding statistical redundancies in the input signals. Fixational insta-
bility might, therefore, contribute to establishing efﬁcient
representations
of natural stimuli.

1 Introduction

Models of the visual system often examine steady-state levels of neural activity during
presentations of visual stimuli. It is difﬁcult, however, to envision how such steady-states
could occur under natural viewing conditions, given that the projection of the visual scene
on the retina is never stationary.
Indeed, the physiological instability of visual ﬁxation
keeps the retinal image in permanent motion even during the brief periods in between
saccades.

Several sources cause this constant jittering of the eye. Fixational eye movements, of which
we are not aware, alternate small saccades with periods of drifts, even when subjects are
instructed to maintain steady ﬁxation [8]. Following macroscopic redirection of gaze, other
small eye movements, such as corrective saccades and post-saccadic drifts, are likely to
occur. Furthermore, outside of the controlled conditions of a laboratory, when the head
is not constrained by a bite bar, movements of the body, as well as imperfections in the
vestibulo-ocular reﬂe x, signiﬁcantly amplify the motion of the retinal image. In the light of

(cid:3)Webpage: www.cns.bu.edu/(cid:24)rucci

this constant jitter, it is remarkable that the brain is capable of constructing a stable percept,
as ﬁxational
instability moves the stimulus by an amount that should be clearly visible (see,
for example, [7]).

Little is known about the purposes of ﬁxational
instability. It is often claimed that small
saccades are necessary to refresh neuronal responses and prevent the disappearance of a
stationary scene, a claim that has remained controversial given the brief durations of natural
visual ﬁxation (reviewed in [16]). Yet, recent theoretical proposals [1, 11] have claimed
that ﬁxational
instability plays a more central role in the acquisition and neural encoding
of visual information than that of simply refreshing neural activity. Consistent with the
ideas of these proposals, neurophysiological investigations have shown that ﬁxational eye
movements strongly inﬂuence the activity of neurons in several areas of the monkey’s brain
[5, 14, 6]. Furthermore, modeling studies that simulated neural responses during free-
viewing suggest that ﬁxational
instability profoundly affects the statistics of thalamic [13]
and thalamocortical activity [10].

This paper summarizes an alternative theory for the existence of ﬁxational
instability. In-
stead of regarding the jitter of visual ﬁxation as necessary for refreshing neuronal responses,
it is argued that the self-motion of the retinal image is essential for properly structuring neu-
ral activity in the early visual system into a format that is suitable for processing at later
stages. It is proposed that ﬁxational
instability is part of a strategy of acquisition of visual
information that enables compact visual representations in the presence of natural visual
input.

2 Neural decorrelation and ﬁxational

instability

It is a long-standing proposal that an important function of early visual processing is the
removal of part of the redundancy that characterizes natural visual input [3]. Less redundant
signals enable more compact representations, in which the same amount of information can
be represented by smaller neuronal ensembles. While several methods exist for eliminating
input redundancies, a possible approach is the removal of pairwise correlations between
the intensity values of nearby pixels [2]. Elimination of these spatial correlations allows
efﬁcient
representations in which neuronal responses tend to be less statistically dependent.

According to the theory described in this paper, ﬁxational
instability contributes to decor-
relating the responses of cells in the retina and the LGN during viewing of natural scenes.
This theory is based on two factors, which are described separately in the following sec-
tions. The ﬁrst
component, analyzed in Section 2.1, is the spatially uncorrelated input
signal that occurs when natural scenes are scanned by jittering eyes. The second factor
is an ampliﬁcation of this spatially uncorrelated input, which is mediated by cell response
characteristics. Section 2.2 examines the interaction between the dynamics of ﬁxational
instability and the temporal characteristics of neurons in the Lateral Geniculate Nucleus
(LGN), the main relay of visual information to the cortex.

2.1 Inﬂuence of ﬁxational

instability on visual input

instability on the statistics of geniculate activity, it is
To analyze the effect of ﬁxational
useful to approximate the input image in a neighborhood of a ﬁxation point x0 by means
of its Taylor series:
I (x) (cid:25) I (x0 ) + rI (x0 ) (cid:1) (x (cid:0) x0 )T + o(jx (cid:0) x0 j2 )
(1)
If the jittering produced by ﬁxational
instability is sufﬁciently small, high-order derivatives
can be neglected, and the input to a location x on the retina during visual ﬁxation can be
approximated by its ﬁrst-order expansion:
S (x; t) (cid:25) I (x) + (cid:24)T (t) (cid:1) rI (x) = I (x) + ~I (x; t)

(2)

where (cid:24)(t) = [(cid:24)x (t); (cid:24)y (t)] is the trajectory of the center of gaze during the period of
t is the time elapsed from ﬁxation onset, I (x) is the visual input at t = 0, and
ﬁxation,
@x (cid:24)x (t) + @ I (x)
~I (x; t) = @ I (x)
@ y (cid:24)y (t) is the dynamic ﬂuctuation in the visual input produced
by ﬁxational
instability.

Eq. 2 allows an analytical estimation of the power spectrum of the signal entering the eye
during the self-motion of the retinal image. Since, according to Eq. 2, the retinal input
S (x; t) can be approximated by the sum of two contributions, I and ~I , its power spectrum
RSS consists of three terms:

RSS (u; w) (cid:25) RI I + R ~I ~I + 2RI ~I
where u and w represent, respectively, spatial and temporal frequency.
Fixational instability can be modeled as an ergodic process with zero mean and uncorre-
lated components along the two axes, i.e., h(cid:24)iT = 0 and R(cid:24)x (cid:24)y (t) = 0. Although not
necessary for the proposed theory, these assumptions simplify our statistical analysis, as
RI ~I is zero, and the power spectrum of the visual input is given by:
(3)
RSS (cid:25) RI I + R ~I ~I
where RI I is the power spectrum of the stimulus, and R ~I ~I depends on both the stimulus
and ﬁxational
instability.
To determine R ~I ~I (u; w), from Eq. 2 follows that
~I (u; w) = iux I (u)(cid:24)x (w) + iuy I (u)(cid:24)y (w)
and under the assumption of uncorrelated motion components, approximating the power
spectrum via ﬁnite Fourier Transform yields:

<

(4)

j ~IT (u; w)j2 >(cid:24);I = R(cid:24)(cid:24) (w)RI I (u)juj2

1
R ~I ~I (u; w) = lim
T
T !1
where ~IT is the Fourier Transform of a signal of duration T , and we have assumed identi-
cal second-order statistics of retinal image motion along the two Cartesian axes. As shown
in Fig. 1 is clear that the presence of the term u2 in Eq. 4 compensates for the scaling
invariance of natural images. That is, since for natural images RI I (u) / u(cid:0)2 , the prod-
uct RI I (u)juj2 whitens RI I by producing a power spectrum R ~I ~I that remains virtually
constant at all spatial frequencies.

2.2 Inﬂuence of ﬁxational

instability on neural activity

This section analyzes the structure of correlated activity during ﬁxational
instability in a
model of the LGN. To delineate the important elements of the theory, we consider linear
approximations of geniculate responses provided by space-time separable kernels. This
assumption greatly simpliﬁes
the analysis of levels of correlation. Results are, however,
general, and the outcomes of simulations with space-time inseparable kernels and different
levels of rectiﬁcation (the most prominent nonlinear behavior of parvocellular geniculate
neurons) can be found in [13, 10].

Mean instantaneous ﬁring rates were estimated on the basis of the convolution between the
input I and the cell spatiotemporal kernel h(cid:11) :
0 Z 1
(cid:0)1 Z 1
(cid:11)(t) = h(cid:11) (x; t) ? I (x; t) = Z t
(cid:0)1
where h(cid:11) (x; t) = g(cid:11) (t)f(cid:11) (x). Kernels were designed on the basis of data from neurophys-
iological recordings to replicate the responses of parvocellular ON-center cells in the LGN

h(cid:11) (x0 ; y 0 ; t0 )I (x (cid:0) x0 ; y (cid:0) y 0 ; t (cid:0) t0 ) dx0 dy 0 dt0

100

r
e
w
o
P

10−2

10−4

R ~I ~I
RII

1
10
Spatial Frequency (cycles/deg)

Figure 1: Fixational instability introduces a spatially uncorrelated component in the vi-
sual input to the retina during viewing of natural scenes. The graph compares the power
spectrum of natural images (RI I ) to the dynamic power spectrum introduced by ﬁxational
instability (R ~I ~I ). The two curves represent radial averages evaluated over 15 pictures of
natural scenes.

of the macaque. The spatial component f(cid:11) (x) was modeled by a standard difference of
Gaussian [15]. The temporal kernel g(cid:11) (t) possessed a biphasic pro ﬁle with positive peak
at 50 ms, negative peak at 75 ms, and overall duration of less than 200 ms [4].

In this section, levels of correlation in the activity of pairs of geniculate neurons are sum-
marized by the correlation pattern ^c(cid:11)(cid:11) (x):
^c(cid:11)(cid:11) (x) = h(cid:11)y (t)(cid:11)z (t)i(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)T ;I
where (cid:11)y (t) and (cid:11)z (t) are the responses of cells with receptive ﬁelds centered at y and z,
and x = y (cid:0) z is the separation between receptive ﬁeld centers. The average is evaluated
over time T and over a set of stimuli I .
With linear models, ^c(cid:11)(cid:11) (x) can be estimated on the basis of the input power spectrum
RSS (u; w):
^c(cid:11)(cid:11) (x) = c(cid:11)(cid:11) (x; t)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)t=0
where R(cid:11)(cid:11) = jH(cid:11) j2RSS (u; w) is the power spectrum of LGN activity (H(cid:11) (u; w) is the
spatiotemporal Fourier transform of the kernel h(cid:11) (x; t)), and F (cid:0)1 represents the inverse
Fourier transform operator.
To evaluate R(cid:11)(cid:11) , substitution of RSS from Eq. 3 and separation of spatial and temporal
elements yield:

and c(cid:11)(cid:11) (x; t) = F (cid:0)1fR(cid:11)(cid:11) g

(5)

(6)

R(cid:11)(cid:11) (cid:25) jG(cid:11) j2 jF(cid:11) j2RI I + jG(cid:11) j2 jF(cid:11) j2R ~I ~I = RS
(cid:11)(cid:11) + RD
(cid:11)(cid:11)
where F(cid:11) (u) and G(cid:11) (w) represent the Fourier Transforms of the spatial and temporal
kernels. Eq. 7 shows that, similar to the retinal input, also the power spectrum of geniculate
(cid:11)(cid:11) depends on
activity can be approximated by the sum of two separate elements. Only RD
ﬁxational
instability. The ﬁrst
term, RS
(cid:11)(cid:11) , is determined by the power spectrum of the

(7)

stimulus and the characteristics of geniculate cells but does not depend on the motion of
the eye during the acquisition of visual information.
By substituting in Eq. 6 the expression of R(cid:11)(cid:11) from Eq. 7, we obtain

(cid:11)(cid:11) (x; t) + cD
c(cid:11)(cid:11) (x; t) (cid:25) cS
(cid:11)(cid:11) (x; t)

(8)

where

(cid:11)(cid:11) (x; t) = F (cid:0)1fRD
(cid:11)(cid:11) (x; t) = F (cid:0)1fRS
(cid:11)(cid:11) (u; w)g and cD
cS
(cid:11)(cid:11) (u; w)g
(cid:11)(cid:11) to the pattern of correlated activity
Eq. 8 shows that ﬁxational
instability adds the term cD
(cid:11)(cid:11) that would obtained with presentation of the same set of stimuli without the self-motion
cS
of the eye.
With presentation of pictures of natural scenes, RI I (w) = 2(cid:25)(cid:14)(w), and the two input
(cid:11)(cid:11) provide, respectively, a static and a dynamic contribution to the
signals RS
(cid:11)(cid:11) and RD
spatiotemporal correlation of geniculate activity. The ﬁrst
term in Eq. 8 gives a correlation
pattern:

(cid:11)(cid:11) (x) = kS F (cid:0)1
S fjF(cid:11) j2RS
^cS
I I (u)g

(9)

where kD = FT

(10)

where kS = jG(0)j2 .
By substituting R ~I ~I from Eq. 4, the second term in Eq. 8 gives a correlation pattern:
(cid:0)1 fjF(cid:11) j2RS
I I (u)juj2 g
^cD
(cid:11)(cid:11) (x) = kDFS
(cid:0)1fjG(cid:11) (w)j2R(cid:24)(cid:24) (w)g(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)t=0
instability. F (cid:0)1
of cell response and ﬁxational
T
Fourier Transform in time and space.
the structure of cor-
To summarize, during the physiological instability of visual ﬁxation,
related activity in a linear model of the LGN is given by the superposition of two spatial
terms, each of them weighted by a coefﬁcient
(kS and kD ) that depends on dynamics:

and F (cid:0)1
S indicate the operations of inverse

is a constant given by the temporal dynamics

^c(cid:11)(cid:11) (x) = kS FS

(cid:0)1fjF(cid:11) j2RS
(cid:0)1 f(jF(cid:11) j2RS
I I (u)juj2 g
I I (u)g + kDFS
Whereas the stimulus contributes to the structure of correlated activity by means of the
power spectrum RS
instability depends on RS
I I , the contribution introduced by ﬁxational
,
~I ~I
a signal that discards the broad correlation of natural images. Since in natural images, most
power is concentrated at low spatial frequencies, the uncorrelated ﬂuctuations
in the input
signals generated by ﬁxational
instability have small amplitudes. That is, RD
I I provides less
I I . However, geniculate cells tend to respond more strongly to changing stim-
power than RS
uli than stationary ones, and kD is larger than kS . Therefore, the small input modulations
introduced by ﬁxational
instability are ampli ﬁed by the dynamics of geniculate cells.

(11)

Fig. 2 shows the structure of correlated activity in the model when images of natural scenes
are examined in the presence of ﬁxational
instability
instability. In this example, ﬁxational
was assumed to possess Gaussian temporal correlation, R(cid:24)(cid:24) (w), with standard deviation
(cid:27)T = 22 ms and amplitude (cid:27)S = 12 arcmin. In addition to the total pattern of correlation
given by Eq. 11, Fig. 2 also shows the patterns of correlation produced by the two compo-
nents ^cS
(cid:11)(cid:11) and ^cD
(cid:11)(cid:11) . Whereas ^cS
(cid:11)(cid:11) was strongly in ﬂuenced by the broad spatial correlations
of natural images, ^cD
(cid:11)(cid:11) , due to its dependence on the whitened power spectrum R ~I ~I , was
determined exclusively by cell receptive ﬁelds. Due to the ampli ﬁcation factor kD , ^cD
(cid:11)(cid:11)
(cid:11)(cid:11) and heavily in ﬂuenced the global structure of
provided a stronger contribution than ^cS
correlated activity.

(cid:11)(cid:11) on the structure of cor-
(cid:11)(cid:11) and ^cD
To examine the relative inﬂuence of the two terms ^cS
related activity, Fig. 3 shows their ratio at separation zero, (cid:26)DS = ^cD
(cid:11)(cid:11) (0), with
(cid:11)(cid:11) (0)=^cS

1

n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
C
 
d
e
z
i
l
a
m
r
o
N

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
0

Static
Dynamic
Total

1
2
3
4
Cell RF Separation (deg.)

5

Figure 2: Patterns of correlation obtained from Eq. 11 when natural images are examined in
the presence of ﬁxational
instability. The three curves represent the total level of correlation
(cid:11)(cid:11) (x) that would be present if the same images were examined
(Total), the correlation ^cS
(cid:11)(cid:11) (x) of ﬁxational
in the absence of ﬁxational
instability (Static), and the contribution ^cD
instability (Dynamic). Data are radial averages evaluated over pairs of cells with the same
separation jjxjj between their receptive ﬁelds.

presentation of natural images and for various parameters of ﬁxational
instability. Fig. 3
(a) shows the effect of varying the spatial amplitude of the retinal jitter. In order to remain
within the range of validity of the Taylor approximation in Eq. 2, only small amplitude val-
ues are considered. As shown by Fig. 3 (a), the larger the instability of visual ﬁxation,
the
(cid:11)(cid:11) . Except for very small
(cid:11)(cid:11) with respect to ^cS
larger the contribution of the dynamic term ^cD
values of (cid:27)S , (cid:26)DS is larger than one, indicating that ^cD
(cid:11)(cid:11) in ﬂuences
the structure of corre-
(cid:11)(cid:11) . Fig. 3 (b) shows the impact of varying (cid:27)T , which
lated activity more strongly than ^cS
deﬁnes
jitter is correlated. Note that (cid:26)DS is a
the temporal window over which ﬁxational
non-monotonic function of (cid:27)T . For a range of (cid:27)T corresponding to intervals shorter than
(cid:11)(cid:11) . Thus, ﬁxational
(cid:11)(cid:11) is signi ﬁcantly larger than ^cS
the typical duration of visual ﬁxation, ^cD
instability strongly inﬂuences correlated activity in the model when it moves the direction
of gaze within a range of a few arcmin and is correlated over a fraction of the duration
of visual ﬁxation. This range of parameters is consistent with the instability of ﬁxation
observed in primates.

3 Conclusions

It has been proposed that neurons in the early visual system decorrelate their responses
to natural stimuli, an operation that is believed to be beneﬁcial
for the encoding of visual
information [2]. The original claim, which was based on psychophysical measurements of
human contrast sensitivity, relies on an inverse proportionality between the spatial response
characteristics of retinal and geniculate neurons and the structure of natural images. How-
ever, data from neurophysiological recordings have clearly shown that neurons in the retina
and the LGN respond signiﬁcantly to low spatial frequencies, in a way that is not compat-
ible with the requirements of Atick and Redlich’s proposal. During natural viewing, input
signals to the retina depend not only on the stimulus, but also on the physiological instabil-
ity of visual ﬁxation. The results of this study show that when natural scenes are examined

c
i
t
a
t
S
/
c
i
m
a
n
y
D
 
o
i
t
a
R

6

5

4

3

2

1

0
0

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

c
i
t
a
t
S
/
c
i
m
a
n
y
D
 
o
i
t
a
R

15

0
0

10

5

s
S (arcmin)
(a)

200

300

100

s
T (ms)
(b)

Figure 3: Inﬂuence of the characteristics of ﬁxational
instability on the patterns of corre-
lated activity during presentation of natural images. The two graphs show the ratio (cid:26)DS
(cid:11)(cid:11) in Eq. 8. Fixational instability was as-
(cid:11)(cid:11) and ^cS
between the peaks of the two terms ^cD
sumed to possess a Gaussian correlation with standard deviation (cid:27)T and amplitude (cid:27)S . (a)
Effect of varying (cid:27)S ((cid:27)T = 22 ms). (b) Effect of varying (cid:27)T ((cid:27)S = 12 arcmin).

instability tends
with jittering eyes, as occurs under natural viewing conditions, ﬁxational
to decorrelate cell responses even if the contrast sensitivity functions of individual neurons
do not counterbalance the power spectrum of visual input.

The theory described in this paper relies of two main elements. The ﬁrst
component is
the presence of a spatially uncorrelated input signal during presentation of natural visual
stimuli (R ~I ~I in Eq. 3). This input signal is a direct consequence of the scale invariance
of natural images. It is a property of natural images that, although the intensity values of
nearby pixels tend to be correlated, changes in intensity around pairs of pixels are uncorre-
lated. This property is not satisﬁed by an arbitrary image. In a spatial grating, for example,
intensity changes at any two locations are highly correlated. During the instability of vi-
sual ﬁxation, neurons receive input from the small regions of the visual ﬁeld covered by the
In the presence of natural images, although the inputs to
jittering of their receptive ﬁelds.
cells with nearby receptive ﬁelds are on average correlated, the ﬂuctuations
in these input
signals produced by ﬁxational
instability are not correlated. Fixational instability appears
to be tuned to the statistics of natural images, as it introduces a spatially uncorrelated signal
only in the presence of visual input with a power spectrum that declines as u(cid:0)2 with spatial
frequency.

The second element of the theory is the neuronal ampli ﬁcation of the spatially uncorre-
lated input signal introduced by the self-motion of the retinal image. This ampli ﬁcation
originates from the interaction between the dynamics of ﬁxational
instability and the tem-
poral sensitivity of geniculate units. Since R ~I ~I attenuates the low spatial frequencies of
the stimulus, it tends to possess less power than RI I . However, in Eq. 11, the contribu-
tions of the two input signals are modulated by the multiplicative terms kS and kD , which
depend on the temporal characteristics of cell responses (both kS and kD ) and ﬁxational
instability (kD only). Since geniculate neurons respond more strongly to changing stimuli
than to stationary ones, kD tends to be higher than kS . Correspondingly, in a linear model
of the LGN, units are highly sensitive to the uncorrelated ﬂuctuations
in the input signals
produced by ﬁxational
instability.

The theory summarized in this study is consistent with the strong modulations of neural
responses observed during ﬁxational eye movements [5, 14, 6], as well as with the results

of recent psychophysical experiments aimed at investigating perceptual in ﬂuences of ﬁx-
ational instability [12, 9]. It should be observed that, since patterns of correlations were
evaluated via Fourier analysis, this study implicitly assumed a steady-state condition of
visual ﬁxation. Further work is needed to extend the proposed theory in order to take into
account time-varying natural stimuli and the nonstationary regime produced by the occur-
rence of saccades.

Acknowledgments

The author thanks Antonino Casile and Gaelle Desbordes for many helpful discussions.
This material is based upon work supported by the National Institute of Health under Grant
EY15732-01 and the National Science Foundation under Grant CCF-0432104.

References
[1] E. Ahissar and A. Arieli. Figuring space by time. Neuron, 32(2):185 –201, 2001.
[2] J. J. Atick and A. Redlich. What does the retina know about natural scenes? Neural Comp.,
4:449–572, 1992.
[3] H. B. Barlow. The coding of sensory messages. In W. H. Thorpe and O. L. Zangwill, editors,
Current Problems in Animal Behaviour, pages 331–360. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, 1961.
[4] E. A. Benardete and E. Kaplan. Dynamics of primate P retinal ganglion cells: Responses to
chromatic and achromatic stimuli. J. Physiol., 519(3):775–790, 1999.
[5] D. A. Leopold and N. K. Logothetis. Microsaccades differentially modulate neural activity in
the striate and extrastriate visual cortex. Exp. Brain. Res., 123:341–345, 1998.
[6] S. Martinez-Conde, S. L. Macknik, and D. H. Hubel. The function of bursts of spikes during
visual ﬁxation in the awake primate lateral geniculate nucleus and primary visual cortex. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 99(21):13920 –13925, 2002.
[7] I. Murakami and P. Cavanagh. A jitter after-effect reveals motion-based stabilization of vision.
Nature, 395(6704):798–801, 1998.
[8] F. Ratliff and L. A. Riggs. Involuntary motions of the eye during monocular ﬁxation. J. Exp.
Psychol., 40:687–701, 1950.
[9] M. Rucci and J. Beck. Effects of ISI and ﬂash duration on the identiﬁcation of brieﬂy ﬂashed
stimuli. Spatial Vision, 18(2):259 –274, 2005.
[10] M. Rucci and A. Casile. Decorrelation of neural activity during ﬁxational instability: Possible
implications for the reﬁnement of V1 receptive ﬁelds. Visual Neurosci., 21:725 –738, 2004.
[11] M. Rucci and A. Casile. Fixational instability and natural image statistics: Implications for early
visual representations. Network: Computation in Neural Systems, 16(2-3):121–138, 2005.
[12] M. Rucci and G. Desbordes. Contributions of ﬁxational eye movements to the discrimination
of brieﬂypresented stimuli. J. Vision, 3(11):852 –64, 2003.
[13] M. Rucci, G. M. Edelman, and J. Wray. Modeling LGN responses during free-viewing: A
possible role of microscopic eye movements in the reﬁnement of cortical orientation selectivity.
J. Neurosci, 20(12):4708–4720, 2000.
[14] D. M. Snodderly, I. Kagan, and M. Gur. Selective activation of visual cortex neurons by ﬁxa-
tional eye movements: Implications for neural coding. Vis. Neurosci., 18:259 –277, 2001.
[15] P. D. Spear, R. J. Moore, C. B. Y. Kim, J. T. Xue, and N. Tumosa. Effects of aging on the
primate visual system: spatial and temporal processing by lateral geniculate neurons in young
adult and old rhesus monkeys. J. Neurophysiol., 72:402 –420, 1994.
[16] R.M. Steinman and J.Z. Levinson. The role of eye movements in the detection of contrast and
spatial detail.
In E. Kowler, editor, Eye Movements and their Role in Visual and Cognitive
Processes, pages 115–212. Elsevier Science, 1990.

